
* A Project Gutenberg Canada Ebook *

This ebook is made available at no cost and with very few
restrictions. These restrictions apply only if (1) you make
a change in the ebook (other than alteration for different
display devices), or (2) you are making commercial use of
the ebook. If either of these conditions applies, please
check gutenberg.ca/links/licence.html before proceeding.

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be
under copyright in some countries. If you live outside Canada,
check your country's copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER
COPYRIGHT IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT DOWNLOAD
OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

Title: Prince Caspian. The Return to Narnia.
Author: Lewis, C. S. [Clive Staples] (1898-1963)
Date of first publication: 1951
Edition used as base for this ebook:
  London: Geoffrey Bles, 1964
  [fifth printing]
Date first posted: 31 January 2014
Date last updated: 31 January 2014
Project Gutenberg Canada ebook #1154

This ebook was produced by Al Haines


[Transcriber's note: Because of copyright considerations,
the illustrations by Pauline Baynes (1922-2008) have been
omitted from this etext.]






  PRINCE CASPIAN

  _The Return to Narnia_


  by
  C. S. LEWIS




  TO
  MARY CLARE HAVARD




  CONTENTS


  I  THE ISLAND
  II  THE ANCIENT TREASURE HOUSE
  III  THE DWARF
  IV  THE DWARF TELLS OF PRINCE CASPIAN
  V  CASPIAN'S ADVENTURE IN THE MOUNTAINS
  VI  THE PEOPLE THAT LIVED IN HIDING
  VII  OLD NARNIA IN DANGER
  VIII  HOW THEY LEFT THE ISLAND
  IX  WHAT LUCY SAW
  X  THE RETURN OF THE LION
  XI  THE LION ROARS
  XII  SORCERY AND SUDDEN VENGEANCE
  XIII  THE HIGH KING IN COMMAND
  XIV  HOW ALL WERE VERY BUSY
  XV  ASLAN MAKES A DOOR IN THE AIR




_Chapter I_

THE ISLAND

Once there were four children whose names were Peter, Susan, Edmund and
Lucy, and it has been told in another book called _The Lion, the Witch
and the Wardrobe_ how they had a remarkable adventure.  They had opened
the door of a magic wardrobe and found themselves in a quite different
world from ours, and in that different world they had become Kings and
Queens in a country called Narnia.  While they were in Narnia they
seemed to reign for years and years; but when they came back through
the door and found themselves in England again, it all seemed to have
taken no time at all.  At any rate, no one noticed that they had ever
been away, and they never told anyone except one very wise grown-up.

That had all happened a year ago, and now all four of them were sitting
on a seat at a railway station with trunks and playboxes piled up round
them.  They were, in fact, on their way back to school.  They had
travelled together as far as this station, which was a junction; and
here, in a few minutes, one train would arrive and take the girls away
to one school, and in about half an hour another train would arrive and
the boys would go off to another school.  The first part of the
journey, when they were all together, always seemed to be part of the
holidays; but now when they would be saying good-by and going different
ways so soon, everyone felt that the holidays were really over and
everyone felt their term time feelings beginning again, and they were
all rather gloomy and no-one could think of anything to say.  Lucy was
going to boarding school for the first time.

It was an empty, sleepy, country station and there was hardly anyone on
the platform except themselves.  Suddenly Lucy gave a sharp little cry,
like someone who has been stung by a wasp.

"What's up, Lu?" said Edmund--and then suddenly broke off and made a
noise like "Ow!"

"What on earth----" began Peter, and then he too suddenly changed what
he had been going to say.  Instead, he said, "Susan, let go!  What are
you doing?  Where are you dragging me to?"

"I'm not touching you," said Susan.  "Someone is pulling _me_.
Oh--oh--oh--stop it!"

Everyone noticed that all the others' faces had gone very white.

"I felt just the same," said Edmund in a breathless voice.  "As if I
were being dragged along.  A most frightful pulling--ugh! it's
beginning again."

"Me too," said Lucy.  "Oh, I can't bear it."

"Look sharp!" shouted Edmund.  "All catch hands and keep together.
This is magic--I can tell by the feeling.  Quick!"

"Yes," said Susan.  "Hold hands.  Oh, I do wish it would stop--oh!"

Next moment the luggage, the seat, the platform, and the station had
completely vanished.  The four children, holding hands and panting,
found themselves standing in a woody place--such a woody place that
branches were sticking into them and there was hardly room to move.
They all rubbed their eyes and took a deep breath.

"Oh, Peter!" exclaimed Lucy.  "Do you think we can possibly have got
back to Narnia?"

"It might be anywhere," said Peter, "I can't see a yard in all these
trees.  Let's try to get into the open--if there is any open."

With some difficulty, and with some stings from nettles and pricks from
thorns, they struggled out of the thicket.  Then they had another
surprise.  Everything became much brighter, and after a few steps they
found themselves at the edge of the wood, looking down on a sandy
beach.  A few yards away a very calm sea was falling on the sand with
such tiny ripples that it made hardly any sound.  There was no land in
sight and no clouds in the sky.  The sun was about where it ought to be
at ten o'clock in the morning, and the sea was a dazzling blue.  They
stood sniffing in the sea-smell.

"By Jove!" said Peter.  "This is good enough."

Five minutes later everyone was barefooted and wading in the cool clear
water.

"This is better than being in a stuffy train on the way back to Latin
and French and Algebra!" said Edmund.  And then for quite a long time
there was no more talking, only splashing and looking for shrimps and
crabs.

"All the same," said Susan presently, "I suppose we'll have to make
some plans.  We shall want something to eat before long."

"We've got the sandwiches Mother gave us for the journey," said Edmund.
"At least I've got mine."

"Not me," said Lucy.  "Mine were in my little bag."

"So were mine," said Susan.

"Mine are in my coat-pocket, there on the beach," said Peter.  "That'll
be two lunches among four.  This isn't going to be such fun."

"At present," said Lucy, "I want something to drink more than something
to eat."

Everyone else now felt thirsty, as one usually is after wading in salt
water under a hot sun.

"It's like being shipwrecked," remarked Edmund.  "In the books they
always find springs of clear, fresh water on the island.  We'd better
go and look for them."

"Does that mean we have to go back into all that thick wood?" said
Susan.

"Not a bit of it," said Peter.  "If there are streams they're bound to
come down to the sea, and if we walk along the beach we're bound to
come to them."

They all now waded back and went first across the smooth, wet sand and
then up to the dry, crumbly sand that sticks to one's toes, and began
putting on their shoes and socks.  Edmund and Lucy wanted to leave them
behind and do their exploring with bare feet, but Susan said this would
be a mad thing to do.  "We might never find them again," she pointed
out, "and we shall want them if we're still here when night comes and
it begins to be cold."

When they were dressed again they set out along the shore with the sea
on their left hand and the wood on their right.  Except for an
occasional seagull it was a very quiet place.  The wood was so thick
and tangled that they could hardly see into it at all; and nothing in
it moved--not a bird, not even an insect.

Shells and seaweed and anemones, or tiny crabs in rock-pools, are all
very well, but you soon get tired of them if you are thirsty.  The
children's feet, after the change from the cool water, felt hot and
heavy.  Susan and Lucy had raincoats to carry.  Edmund had put down his
coat on the station seat just before the magic overtook them, and he
and Peter took it in turns to carry Peter's great-coat.

Presently the shore began to curve round to the right.  About quarter
of an hour later, after they had crossed a rocky ridge which ran out
into a point, it made quite a sharp turn.  Their backs were now to the
part of the sea which had met them when they first came out of the
wood, and now, looking ahead, they could see across the water another
shore, thickly wooded like the one they were exploring.

"I wonder, is that an island or do we join on to it presently?" said
Lucy.

"Don't know," said Peter and they all plodded on in silence.

The shore that they were walking on drew nearer and nearer to the
opposite shore, and as they came round each promontory the children
expected to find the place where the two joined.  But in this they were
disappointed.  They came to some rocks which they had to climb and from
the top they could see a fair way ahead and--"Oh bother!" said Edmund,
"it's no good.  We shan't be able to get to those other woods at all.
We're on an island!"

It was true.  At this point the channel between them and the opposite
coast was only about thirty or forty yards wide; but they could now see
that this was its narrowest place.  After that, their own coast bent
round to the right again and they could see open sea between it and the
mainland.  It was obvious that they had already come much more than
half-way round the island.

"Look!" said Lucy suddenly.  "What's that?"  She pointed to a long
silvery, snake-like thing that lay across the beach.

"A stream!  A stream!" shouted the others, and, tired as they were,
they lost no time in clattering down the rocks and racing to the fresh
water.  They knew that the stream would be better to drink farther up,
away from the beach, so they went at once to the spot where it came out
of the wood.  The trees were as thick as ever, but the stream had made
itself a deep course between high mossy banks so that by stooping you
could follow it up in a sort of tunnel of leaves.  They dropped on
their knees by the first brown, dimply pool and drank and drank, and
dipped their faces in the water, and then dipped their arms in up to
the elbow.

"Now," said Edmund, "what about those sandwiches?"

"Oh, hadn't we better save them?" said Susan.  "We may need them far
worse later on."

"I do wish," said Lucy, "now that we're not thirsty, we could go on
feeling as not-hungry as we did when we _were_ thirsty."

"But what about those sandwiches?" repeated Edmund.  "There's no good
saving them till they go bad.  You've got to remember it's a good deal
hotter here than in England and we've been carrying them about in
pockets for hours."  So they got out the two packets and divided them
into four portions, and nobody had quite enough, but it was a great
deal better than nothing.  Then they talked about their plans for the
next meal.  Lucy wanted to go back to the sea and catch shrimps, until
someone pointed out that they had no nets.  Edmund said they must
gather gulls' eggs from the rocks, but when they came to think of it
they couldn't remember having seen any gulls' eggs and wouldn't be able
to cook them if they found any.  Peter thought to himself that unless
they had some stroke of luck they would soon be glad to eat eggs raw,
but he didn't see any point in saying this out loud.  Susan said it was
a pity they had eaten the sandwiches so soon.  One or two tempers very
nearly got lost at this stage.  Finally Edmund said:

"Look here.  There's only one thing to be done.  We must explore the
wood.  Hermits and knights-errant and people like that always manage to
live somehow if they're in a forest.  They find roots and berries and
things."

"What sort of roots?" asked Susan.

"I always thought it meant roots of trees," said Lucy.

"Come on," said Peter, "Ed is right.  And we must try to do something.
And it'll be better than going out into the glare and the sun again."

So they all got up and began to follow the stream.  It was very hard
work.  They had to stoop under branches and climb over branches, and
they blundered through great masses of stuff like rhododendrons and
tore their clothes and got their feet wet in the stream; and still
there was no noise at all except the noise of the stream and the noises
they were making themselves.  They were beginning to get very tired of
it when they noticed a delicious smell, and then a flash of bright
colour high above them at the top of the right bank.

"I say!" exclaimed Lucy.  "I do believe that's an apple tree."

It was.  They panted up the steep bank, forced their way through some
brambles, and found themselves standing round an old tree that was
heavy with large yellowish-golden apples as firm and juicy as you could
wish to see.

"And this is not the only tree," said Edmund with his mouth full of
apple.  "Look there--and there."

"Why, there are dozens of them," said Susan, throwing away the core of
her first apple and picking her second.  "This must have been an
orchard--long, long ago, before the place went wild and the wood grew
up."

"Then this was once an inhabited island," said Peter.

"And what's that?" said Lucy, pointing ahead.

"By Jove, it's a wall," said Peter.  "An old stone wall."

Pressing their way between the laden branches they reached the wall.
It was very old, and broken down in places, with moss and wallflowers
growing on it, but it was higher than all but the tallest trees.  And
when they came quite close to it they found a great arch which must
once have had a gate in it but was now almost filled up with the
largest of all the apple trees.  They had to break some of the branches
to get past, and when they had done so they all blinked because the
daylight became suddenly much brighter.  They found themselves in a
wide open place with walls all round it.  In here there were no trees,
only level grass and daisies, and ivy, and grey walls.  It was a
bright, secret, quiet place, and rather sad; and all four stepped out
into the middle of it, glad to be able to straighten their backs and
move their limbs freely.




_Chapter II_

THE ANCIENT TREASURE HOUSE

"This wasn't a garden," said Susan presently.  "It was a castle and
this must have been the courtyard."

"I see what you mean," said Peter.  "Yes.  That is the remains of a
tower.  And there is what used to be a flight of steps going up to the
top of the walls.  And look at those other steps--the broad, shallow
ones--going up to that doorway.  It must have been the door into the
great hall."

"Ages ago, by the look of it," said Edmund.

"Yes, ages ago," said Peter.  "I wish we could find out who the people
were that lived in this castle; and how long ago."

"It gives me a queer feeling," said Lucy.

"Does it, Lu?" said Peter, turning and looking hard at her.  "Because
it does the same to me.  It is the queerest thing that has happened
this queer day.  I wonder where we are and what it all means?"

While they were talking they had crossed the courtyard and gone through
the other doorway into what had once been the hall.  This was now very
like the courtyard, for the roof had long since disappeared and it was
merely another space of grass and daisies, except that it was shorter
and narrower and the walls were higher.  Across the far end there was a
kind of terrace about three feet higher than the rest.

"I wonder, was it really the hall?" said Susan.  "What that terrace
kind of thing?"

"Why, you silly," said Peter (who had become strangely excited), "don't
you see?  That was the dais where the High Table was, where the King
and the great lords sat.  Anyone would think you had forgotten that we
ourselves were once Kings and Queens and sat on a dais just like that,
in our great hall."

"In our castle of Cair Paravel," continued Susan in a dreamy and rather
sing-song voice, "at the mouth of the great river of Narnia.  How could
I forget?"

"How it all comes back!" said Lucy.  "We could pretend we were in Cair
Paravel now.  This hall must have been very like the great hall we
feasted in."

"But unfortunately without the feast," said Edmund.  "It's getting
late, you know.  Look how long the shadows are.  And have you noticed
that it isn't so hot?"

"We shall need a camp fire if we've got to spend the night here," said
Peter.  "I've got matches.  Let's go and see if we can collect some dry
wood."

Everyone saw the sense of this, and for the next half-hour they were
busy.  The orchard through which they had first come into the ruins
turned out not to be a good place for firewood.  They tried the other
side of the castle, passing out of the hall by a little side door into
a maze of stony humps and hollows which must once have been passages
and smaller rooms but was now all nettles and wild roses.  Beyond this
they found a wide gap in the castle wall and stepped through it into a
wood of darker and bigger trees where they found dead branches and
rotten wood and sticks and dry leaves and fir-cones in plenty.  They
went to and fro with bundles until they had a good pile on the dais.
At the fifth journey they found the well, just outside the hall, hidden
in weeds, but clean and fresh and deep when they had cleared these
away.  The remains of a stone pavement ran half-way round it.  Then the
girls went out to pick some more apples and the boys built the fire, on
the dais and fairly close to the corner between two walls, which they
thought would be the snuggest and warmest place.  They had great
difficulty in lighting it and used a lot of matches, but they succeeded
in the end.  Finally, all four sat down with their backs to the wall
and their faces to the fire.  They tried roasting some of the apples on
the ends of sticks.  But roast apples are not much good without sugar,
and they are too hot to eat with your fingers till they are too cold to
be worth eating.  So they had to content themselves with raw apples,
which, as Edmund said, made one realise that school suppers weren't so
bad after all--"I shouldn't mind a good thick slice of bread and
margarine this minute," he added.  But the spirit of adventure was
rising in them all, and no one really wanted to be back at school.

Shortly after the last apple had been eaten, Susan went out to the well
to get another drink.  When she came back she was carrying something in
her hand.

"Look," she said in a rather choking kind of voice.  "I found it by the
well."  She handed it to Peter and sat down.  The others thought she
looked and sounded as if she might be going to cry.  Edmund and Lucy
eagerly bent forward to see what was in Peter's hand--a little bright
thing that gleamed in the firelight.

"Well, I'm--I'm jiggered," said Peter, and his voice also sounded
queer.  Then he handed it to the others.

All now saw what it was--a little chess-knight, ordinary in size but
extraordinarily heavy because it was made of pure gold; and the eyes in
the horse's head were two tiny little rubies--or rather one was, for
the other had been knocked out.

"Why!" said Lucy, "it's exactly like one of the golden chessmen we used
to play with when we were Kings and Queens at Cair Paravel."

"Cheer up, Su," said Peter to his other sister.

"I can't help it," said Susan.  "It brought back--oh, such lovely
times.  And I remembered playing chess with fauns and good giants, and
the mer-people singing in the sea, and my beautiful horse--and--and----"

"Now," said Peter in a quite different voice, "it's about time we four
started using our brains."

"What about?" asked Edmund.

"Have none of you guessed where we are?" said Peter.

"Go on, go on," said Lucy.  "I've felt for hours that there was some
wonderful mystery hanging over this place."

"Fire ahead, Peter," said Edmund.  "We're all listening."

"We are in the ruins of Cair Paravel itself," said Peter.

"But, I say," replied Edmund.  "I mean, how do you make that out?  This
place has been ruined for ages.  Look at all those big trees growing
right up to the gates.  Look at the very stones.  Anyone can see that
nobody has lived here for hundreds of years."

"I know," said Peter.  "That is the difficulty.  But let's leave that
out for the moment.  I want to take the points one by one.  First
point: this hall is exactly the same shape and size as the hall at Cair
Paravel.  Just picture a roof on this, and a coloured pavement instead
of grass, and tapestries on the walls, and you get our royal banqueting
hall."

No one said anything.

"Second point," continued Peter.  "The castle well is exactly where our
well was, a little to the south of the great hall; and it is exactly
the same size and shape."

Again there was no reply.

"Third point: Susan has just found one of our old chessmen--or
something as like one of them as two peas."

Still nobody answered.

"Fourth point.  Don't you remember--it was the very day before the
ambassadors came from the King of Calormen--don't you remember planting
the orchard outside the north gate of Cair Paravel?  The greatest of
all the wood-people, Pomona herself, came to put good spells on it.  It
was those very decent little chaps the moles who did the actual
digging.  Can you have forgotten that funny old Lilygloves, the chief
mole, leaning on his spade and saying, 'Believe me, your Majesty,
you'll be glad of these fruit trees one day.'  And by Jove he was
right."

"I do!  I do!" said Lucy, and clapped her hands.

"But look here, Peter," said Edmund.  "This must be all rot.  To begin
with, we didn't plant the orchard slap up against the gate.  We
wouldn't have been such fools."

"No, of course not," said Peter.  "But it has grown up to the gate
since."

"And for another thing," said Edmund, "Cair Paravel wasn't on an
island."

"Yes, I've been wondering about that.  But it was a
what-do-you-call-it, a peninsula.  Jolly nearly an island.  Couldn't it
have been made an island since our time?  Somebody has dug a channel."

"But half a moment!" said Edmund.  "You keep on saying _since our
time_.  But it's only a year ago since we came back from Narnia.  And
you want to make out that in one year castles have fallen down, and
great forests have grown up, and little trees we saw planted ourselves
have turned into a big old orchard, and goodness knows what else.  It's
all impossible."

"There's one thing," said Lucy.  "If this is Cair Paravel there ought
to be a door at this end of the dais.  In fact we ought to be sitting
with our backs against it at this moment.  You know--the door that led
down to the treasure chamber."

"I suppose there isn't a door," said Peter, getting up.

The wall behind them was a mass of ivy.

"We can soon find out," said Edmund, taking up one of the sticks that
they had laid ready for putting on the fire.  He began beating the
ivied wall.  Tap-tap went the stick against the stone; and again,
tap-tap; and then, all at once, boom-boom, with a quite different
sound, a hollow, wooden sound.

"Great Scott!" said Edmund.

"We must clear this ivy away," said Peter.

"Oh, do let's leave it alone," said Susan.  "We can try it in the
morning.  If we've got to spend the night here I don't want an open
door at my back and a great big black hole that anything might come out
of, besides the draught and the damp.  And it'll soon be dark."

"Susan!  How can you?" said Lucy with a reproachful glance.  But both
the boys were too much excited to take any notice of Susan's advice.
They worked at the ivy with their hands and with Peter's pocket knife
till the knife broke.  After that they used Edmund's.  Soon the whole
place where they had been sitting was covered with ivy; and at last
they had the door cleared.

"Locked, of course," said Peter.

"But the wood's all rotten," said Edmund.  "We can pull it to bits in
no time, and it will make extra firewood.  Come on."

It took them longer than they expected and, before they had done, the
great hall had grown dusky and the first star or two had come out
overhead.  Susan was not the only one who felt a slight shudder as the
boys stood above the pile of splintered wood, rubbing the dirt off
their hands and staring into the cold, dark opening they had made.

"Now for a torch," said Peter.

"Oh, what is the good?" said Susan.  "And as Edmund said----"

"I'm not saying it now," Edmund interrupted.  "I still don't
understand, but we can settle that later.  I suppose you're coming
down, Peter?"

"We must," said Peter.  "Cheer up, Susan.  It's no good behaving like
kids now that we are back in Narnia.  You're a queen here.  And anyway
no-one could go to sleep with a mystery like this on our minds."

They tried to use long sticks as torches but this was not a success.
If you held them with the lighted end up they went out, and if you held
them the other way they scorched your hand and the smoke got in your
eyes.  In the end they had to use Edmund's electric torch; luckily it
had been a birthday present less than a week ago and the battery was
almost new.  He went first, with the light.  Then came Lucy, then
Susan, and Peter brought up the rear.

"I've come to the top of the steps," said Edmund.

"Count them," said Peter.

"One--two--three," said Edmund, as he went cautiously down, and so up
to sixteen.  "And this is the bottom," he shouted back.

"Then it really must be Cair Paravel," said Lucy.  "There were
sixteen."  Nothing more was said till all four were standing in a knot
together at the foot of the stairway.  Then Edmund flashed his torch
slowly round.

"O--o--o--oh!!" said all the children at once.

For now all knew that it was indeed the ancient treasure chamber of
Cair Paravel where they had once reigned as Kings and Queens of Narnia.
There was a kind of path up the middle (as it might be in a
greenhouse), and along each side at intervals stood rich suits of
armour, like knights guarding the treasures.  In between the suits of
armour, and on each side of the path, were shelves covered with
precious things--necklaces and arm rings and finger rings and golden
bowls and dishes and long tusks of ivory, brooches and coronets and
chains of gold, and heaps of unset stones lying piled anyhow as if they
were marbles or potatoes--diamonds, rubies, carbuncles, emeralds,
topazes and amethysts.  Under the shelves stood great chests of oak
strengthened with iron bars and heavily padlocked.  And it was bitterly
cold, and so still that they could hear themselves breathing, and the
treasures were so covered with dust that unless they had realised where
they were and remembered most of the things, they would hardly have
known they were treasures.  There was something sad and a little
frightening about the place, because it all seemed so forsaken and long
ago.  That was why nobody said anything for at least a minute.

Then, of course, they began walking about and picking things up to look
at.  It was like meeting very old friends.  If you had been there you
would have heard them saying things like, "Oh look!  Our coronation
rings--do you remember first wearing this?--Why, this is the little
brooch we all thought was lost--I say, isn't that the armour you wore
in the great tournament in the Lone Islands?--do you remember the dwarf
making that for me?--do you remember drinking out of that horn?--do you
remember, do you remember?"

But suddenly Edmund said, "Look here.  We mustn't waste the battery:
goodness knows how often we shall need it.  Hadn't we better take what
we want and get out again?"

"We must take the gifts," said Peter.  For long ago at a Christmas in
Narnia he and Susan and Lucy had been given certain presents which they
valued more than their whole kingdom.  Edmund had had no gift, because
he was not with them at the time.  (This was his own fault, and you can
read about it in the other book.)

They all agreed with Peter and walked up the path to the wall at the
far end of the treasure chamber, and there, sure enough, the gifts were
still hanging.  Lucy's was the smallest for it was only a little
bottle.  But the bottle was made of diamond instead of glass, and it
was still more than half full of the magical cordial which would heal
almost every wound and every illness.  Lucy said nothing and looked
very solemn as she took her gift down from its place and slung the belt
over her shoulder and once more felt the bottle at her side where it
used to hang in the old days.  Susan's gift had been a bow and arrows
and a horn.  The bow was still there, and the ivory quiver, full of
well-feathered arrows, but--"Oh, Susan," said Lucy.  "Where's the horn?"

"Oh bother, bother, bother," said Susan after she had thought for a
moment.  "I remember now.  I took it with me the last day of all, the
day we went hunting the White Stag.  It must have got lost when we
blundered back into that other place--England, I mean."

Edmund whistled.  It was indeed a most shattering loss; for this was an
enchanted horn and, whenever you blew it, help was certain to come to
you, wherever you were.

"Just the sort of thing that might come in handy in a place like this,"
said Edmund.

"Never mind," said Susan, "I've still got the bow."  And she took it.

"Won't the string be perished, Su?" said Peter.

But whether by some magic in the air of the treasure chamber or not,
the bow was still in working order.  Archery and swimming were the
things Susan was good at.  In a moment she had bent the bow and then
she gave one little pluck to the string.  It twanged: a chirruping
twang that vibrated through the whole room.  And that one small noise
brought back the old days to the children's minds more than anything
that had happened yet.  All the battles and hunts and feasts came
rushing into their heads together.

Then she unstrung the bow again and slung the quiver at her side.

Next, Peter took down his gift--the shield with the great red lion on
it, and the royal sword.  He blew, and rapped them on the floor, to get
off the dust.  He fitted the shield on his arm and slung the sword by
his side.  He was afraid at first that it might be rusty and stick to
the sheath.  But it was not so.  With one swift motion he drew it and
held it up, shining in the torchlight.

"It is my sword Rhindon," he said; "with it I killed the Wolf."  There
was a new tone in his voice, and the others all felt that he was really
Peter the High King again.  Then, after a little pause, everyone
remembered that they must save the battery.

They climbed the stair again and made up a good fire and lay down close
together for warmth.  The ground was very hard and uncomfortable, but
they fell asleep in the end.




_Chapter III_

THE DWARF

The worst of sleeping out of doors is that you wake up so dreadfully
early.  And when you wake you have to get up because the ground is so
hard that you are uncomfortable.  And it makes matters worse if there
is nothing but apples for breakfast and you have had nothing but apples
for supper the night before.  When Lucy had said--truly enough--that it
was a glorious morning, there did not seem to be anything else nice to
be said.  Edmund said what everyone was feeling, "We've simply got to
get off this island."

When they had drunk from the well and splashed their faces they all
went down the stream again to the shore and stared at the channel which
divided them from the mainland.

"We'll have to swim," said Edmund.

"It would be all right for Su," said Peter (Susan had won prizes for
swimming at school).  "But I don't know about the rest of us."  By "the
rest of us" he really meant Edmund, who couldn't yet do two lengths at
the school baths, and Lucy, who could hardly swim at all.

"Anyway," said Susan, "there may be currents.  Father says it's never
wise to bathe in a place you don't know."

"But, Peter," said Lucy, "look here.  I know I can't swim for nuts at
home--in England, I mean.  But couldn't we all swim long ago--if it was
long ago--when we were kings and queens in Narnia?  We could ride then
too, and do all sorts of things.  Don't you think----"

"Ah, but we were sort of grown-up then," said Peter.  "We reigned for
years and years and learned to do things.  Aren't we just back at our
proper ages again now?"

"Oh!" said Edmund in a voice which made everyone stop talking and
listen to him.

"I've just seen it all," he said.

"Seen what?" asked Peter.

"Why, the whole thing," said Edmund.  "You know what we were puzzling
about last night, that it was only a year ago since we left Narnia but
everything looks as if no one had lived in Cair Paravel for hundreds of
years?  Well, don't you see?  You know that, however long we seemed to
have lived in Narnia, when we got back through the wardrobe it seemed
to have taken no time at all?"

"Go on," said Susan.  "I think I'm beginning to understand."

"And that means," continued Edmund, "that, once you're out of Narnia,
you have no idea how Narnian time is going.  Why shouldn't hundreds of
years have gone past in Narnia while only one year has passed for us in
England?"

"By Jove, Ed," said Peter.  "I believe you've got it.  In that sense it
really was hundreds of years ago that we lived in Cair Paravel.  And
now we're coming back to Narnia just as if we were Crusaders or
Anglo-Saxons or Ancient Britons or someone coming back to modern
England!"

"How excited they'll be to see us----" began Lucy, but at the same
moment everyone else said "Hush!" or "Look!"  For now something was
happening.

There was a wooded point on the mainland a little to their right, and
they all felt sure that just beyond that point must be the mouth of the
river.  And now, round that point there came into sight a boat.  When
it had cleared the point, it turned and began coming along the channel
towards them.  There were two people on board, one rowing, the other
sitting in the stern and holding a bundle that twitched and moved as if
it were alive.  Both these people seemed to be soldiers.  They had
steel caps on their heads and light shirts of chain-mail.  Their faces
were bearded and hard.  The children drew back from the beach into the
wood and watched without moving a finger.

"This'll do," said the soldier in the stern when the boat had come
about opposite to them.

"What about tying a stone to his feet, Corporal?" said the other,
resting on his oars.

"Garn!" growled the other.  "We don't need that, and we haven't brought
one.  He'll drown sure enough without a stone, as long as we've tied
the cords right."  With these words he rose and lifted his bundle.
Peter now saw that it was really alive and was in fact a Dwarf, bound
hand and foot but struggling as hard as he could.  Next moment he heard
a twang just beside his ear, and all at once the soldier threw up his
arms, dropping the Dwarf in the bottom of the boat, and fell over into
the water.  He floundered away to the far bank and Peter knew that
Susan's arrow had struck on his helmet.  He turned and saw that she was
very pale but was already fitting a second arrow to the string.  But it
was never used.  As soon as he saw his companion fall, the other
soldier, with a loud cry, jumped out of the boat on the far side, and
he also floundered through the water (which was apparently just in his
depth) and disappeared into the woods of the mainland.

"Quick!  Before she drifts!" shouted Peter.  He and Susan, fully
dressed as they were, plunged in, and before the water was up to their
shoulders their hands were on the side of the boat.  In a few seconds
they had hauled her to the bank and lifted the Dwarf out, and Edmund
was busily engaged in cutting his bonds with the pocket knife.
(Peter's sword would have been sharper, but a sword is very
inconvenient for this sort of work because you can't hold it anywhere
lower than the hilt.) When at last the dwarf was free, he sat up,
rubbed his arms and legs, and exclaimed:

"Well, whatever they say, you don't _feel_ like ghosts."

Like most Dwarfs he was very stocky and deep-chested.  He would have
been about three feet high if he had been standing up, and an immense
beard and whiskers of coarse red hair left little of his face to be
seen except beak-like nose and twinkling black eyes.

"Anyway," he continued, "ghosts or not, you've saved my life and I'm
extremely obliged to you."

"But why should we be ghosts?" asked Lucy.

"I've been told all my life," said the Dwarf, "that these woods along
the shore were as full of ghosts as they were of trees.  That's what
the story is.  And that's why, when they want to get rid of anyone,
they usually bring him down here (like they were doing with me) and say
they'll leave him to the ghosts.  But I always wondered if they didn't
really drown 'em or cut their throats.  I never quite believed in the
ghosts.  But those two cowards you've just shot believed all right.
They were more frightened of taking me to my death than I was of going!"

"Oh," said Susan.  "So that's why they both ran away."

"Eh?  What's that?" said the Dwarf.

"They got away," said Edmund.  "To the mainland."

"I wasn't shooting to kill, you know," said Susan.  She would not have
liked anyone to think she could miss at such a short range.

"Hm," said the Dwarf.  "That's not so good.  That may mean trouble
later on.  Unless they hold their tongues for their own sake."

"What were they going to drown you for?" asked Peter.

"Oh, I'm a dangerous criminal, I am," said the Dwarf cheerfully.  "But
that's a long story.  Meantime, I was wondering if perhaps you were
going to ask me to breakfast?  You've no idea what an appetite it gives
one, being executed."

"There's only apples," said Lucy dolefully.

"Better than nothing, but not so good as fresh fish," said the Dwarf.
"It looks as if I'll have to ask you to breakfast instead.  I saw some
fishing tackle in that boat.  And anyway, we must take her round to the
other side of the island.  We don't want anyone from the mainland
coming down and seeing her."

"I ought to have thought of that myself," said Peter.

The four children and the Dwarf went down to the water's edge, pushed
off the boat with some difficulty, and scrambled aboard.  The Dwarf at
once took charge.  The oars were of course too big for him to use, so
Peter rowed and the Dwarf steered them north along the channel and
presently eastward round the tip of the island.  From here the children
could see right up the river, and all the bays and headlands of the
coast beyond it.  They thought they could recognise bits of it, but the
woods, which had grown up since their time, made everything look very
different.

When they had come round into open sea on the east of the island, the
Dwarf took to fishing.  They had an excellent catch of pavenders, a
beautiful rainbow-coloured fish which they all remembered eating in
Cair Paravel in the old days.  When they had caught enough they ran the
boat up into a little creek and moored her to a tree.  The Dwarf, who
was a most capable person (and, indeed, though one meets bad Dwarfs, I
never heard of a Dwarf who was a fool), cut the fish open, cleaned
them, and said:

"Now, what we want next is some firewood."

"We've got some up at the castle," said Edmund.

The Dwarf gave a low whistle.  "Beards and bedsteads!" he said.  "So
there really is a castle, after all?"

"It's only a ruin," said Lucy.

The Dwarf stared round at all four of them with a very curious
expression on his face.  "And who on earth----" he began, but then
broke off and said, "No matter.  Breakfast first.  But one thing before
we go on.  Can you lay your hand on your hearts and tell me I'm really
alive?  Are you sure I wasn't drowned and we're not all ghosts
together?"

When they had all reassured him, the next question was how to carry the
fish.  They had nothing to string them on and no basket.  They had to
use Edmund's hat in the end because no one else had a hat.  He would
have made much more fuss about this if he had not by now been so
ravenously hungry.

At first the Dwarf did not seem very comfortable in the castle.  He
kept looking round and sniffing and saying, "H'm.  Looks a bit spooky
after all.  Smells like ghosts, too."  But he cheered up when it came
to lighting the fire and showing them how to roast the fresh pavenders
in the embers.  Eating hot fish with no forks, and one pocket knife
between five people, is a messy business and there were several burnt
fingers before the meal was ended; but, as it was now nine o'clock and
they had been up since five, nobody minded the burns so much as you
might have expected.  When everyone had finished off with a drink from
the well and an apple or so, the Dwarf produced a pipe about the size
of his own arm, filled it, lit it, blew a great cloud of fragrant smoke
and said, "Now."

"You tell us your story first," said Peter.  "And then we'll tell you
ours."

"Well," said the Dwarf, "as you've saved my life it is only fair you
should have your own way.  But I hardly know where to begin.  First of
all I'm a messenger of King Caspian's."

"Who's he?" asked four voices all at once.

"Caspian the Tenth, King of Narnia, and long may he reign!" answered
the Dwarf.  "That is to say, he ought to be King of Narnia and we hope
he will be.  At present he is only King of us Old Narnians----"

"What do you mean by _old_ Narnians, please?" asked Lucy.

"Why, that's us," said the Dwarf.  "We're a kind of rebellion, I
suppose."

"I see," said Peter.  "And Caspian is the chief Old Narnian."

"Well, in a manner of speaking," said the Dwarf, scratching his head.
"But he's really a New Narnian himself, a Telmarine, if you follow me."

"I don't," said Edmund.

"It's worse than the Wars of the Roses," said Lucy.

"Oh dear," said the Dwarf.  "I'm doing this very badly.  Look here: I
think I'll have to go right back to the beginning and tell you how
Caspian grew up in his uncle's court and how he comes to be on our side
at all.  But it'll be a long story."

"All the better," said Lucy.  "We love stories."

So the Dwarf settled down and told his tale.  I shall not give it to
you in his words, putting in all the children's questions and
interruptions, because it would take too long and be confusing, and,
even so, it would leave out some points that the children only heard
later.  But the gist of the story, as they knew it in the end, was as
follows.




_Chapter IV_

THE DWARF TELLS OF PRINCE CASPIAN

Prince Caspian lived in a great castle in the centre of Narnia with his
uncle, Miraz, the King of Narnia, and his aunt, who had red hair and
was called Queen Prunaprismia.  His father and mother were dead and the
person whom Caspian loved best was his nurse, and though (being a
prince) he had wonderful toys which would do almost anything but talk,
he liked best the last hour of the day when the toys had all been put
back in their cupboards and Nurse would tell him stories.

He did not care much for his uncle and aunt, but about twice a week his
uncle would send for him and they would walk up and down together for
half an hour on the terrace at the south side of the castle.  One day,
while they were doing this, the King said to him,

"Well, boy, we must soon teach you to ride and use a sword.  You know
that your aunt and I have no children, so it looks as if you might have
to be King when I'm gone.  How shall you like that, eh?"

"I don't know, Uncle," said Caspian.

"Don't know, eh?" said Miraz.  "Why, I should like to know what more
anyone could wish for!"

"All the same, I _do_ wish," said Caspian.

"What do you wish?" asked the King.

"I wish--I wish--I wish I could have lived in the Old Days," said
Caspian.  (He was only a very little boy at the time.)

Up till now King Miraz had been talking in the tiresome way that some
grown-ups have, which makes it quite clear that they are not really
interested in what they are saying, but now he suddenly gave Caspian a
very sharp look.

"Eh?  What's that?" he said.  "What old days do you mean?"

"Oh, don't you know, Uncle?" said Caspian.  "When everything was quite
different.  When all the animals could talk, and there were nice people
who lived in the streams and the trees.  Naiads and Dryads they were
called.  And there were Dwarfs.  And there were lovely little Fauns in
all the woods.  They had feet like goats.  And----"

"That's all nonsense, for babies," said the King sternly.  "Only fit
for babies, do you hear?  You're getting too old for that sort of
stuff.  At your age you ought to be thinking of battles and adventures,
not fairy tales."

"Oh, but there _were_ battles and adventures in those days," said
Caspian.  "Wonderful adventures.  Once there was a White Witch and she
made herself Queen of the whole country.  And she made it so that it
was always winter.  And then two boys and two girls came from somewhere
and so they killed the Witch and they were made Kings and Queens of
Narnia, and their names were Peter and Susan and Edmund and Lucy.  And
so they reigned for ever so long and everyone had a lovely time, and it
was all because of Aslan----"

"Who's he?" said Miraz.  And if Caspian had been a very little older,
the tone of his uncle's voice would have warned him that it would be
wiser to shut up.  But he babbled on,

"Oh, don't you know?" he said.  "Aslan is the great Lion who comes from
over the sea."

"Who has been telling you all this nonsense?" said the King in a voice
of thunder.  Caspian was frightened and said nothing.

"Your Royal Highness," said King Miraz, letting go of Caspian's hand,
which he had been holding till now, "I insist upon being answered.
Look me in the face.  Who has been telling you this pack of lies?"

"N--Nurse," faltered Caspian, and burst into tears.

"Stop that noise," said his uncle, taking Caspian by the shoulders and
giving him a shake.  "Stop it.  And never let me catch you talking--or
_thinking_ either--about all those silly stories again.  There never
were those Kings and Queens.  How could there be two Kings at the same
time?  And there's no such person as Aslan.  And there are no such
things as lions.  And there never was a time when animals could talk.
Do you hear?"

"Yes, Uncle," sobbed Caspian.

"Then let's have no more of it," said the King.  Then he called to one
of the gentlemen-in-waiting who were standing at the far end of the
terrace and said in a cold voice, "Conduct His Royal Highness to his
apartments and send His Royal Highness's nurse to me AT ONCE."


Next day Caspian found what a terrible thing he had done, for Nurse had
been sent away without even being allowed to say good-bye to him, and
he was told he was to have a Tutor.

Caspian missed his nurse very much and shed many tears; and because he
was so miserable, he thought about the old stories of Narnia far more
than before.  He dreamed of Dwarfs and Dryads every night and tried
very hard to make the dogs and cats in the castle talk to him.  But the
dogs only wagged their tails and the cats only purred.

Caspian felt sure that he would hate the new Tutor, but when the new
Tutor arrived about a week later he turned out to be the sort of person
it is almost impossible not to like.  He was the smallest, and also the
fattest, man Caspian had ever seen.  He had a long, silvery, pointed
beard which came down to his waist, and his face, which was brown and
covered with wrinkles, looked very wise, very ugly, and very kind.  His
voice was grave and his eyes were merry so that, until you got to know
him really well, it was hard to know when he was joking and when he was
serious.  His name was Doctor Cornelius.

Of all his lessons with Doctor Cornelius the one that Caspian liked
best was History.  Up till now, except for Nurse's stories, he had
known nothing about the History of Narnia, and he was very surprised to
learn that the royal family were newcomers in the country.

"It was your Highness's ancestor, Caspian the First," said Doctor
Cornelius, "who first conquered Narnia and made it his kingdom.  It was
he who brought all your nation into the country.  You are not native
Narnians at all.  You are all Telmarines--that is, you all came from
the Land of Telmar, far beyond the Western Mountains.  That is why
Caspian the First is called Caspian the Conqueror."

"Please, Doctor," asked Caspian one day, "who lived in Narnia before we
all came here out of Telmar?"

"No men--or very few--lived in Narnia before the Telmarines took it,"
said Doctor Cornelius.

"Then who did my great-great-grandcesters conquer?"

"_Whom_, not _who_, your Highness," said Doctor Cornelius.  "Perhaps it
is time to turn from History to Grammar."

"Oh please, not yet," said Caspian.  "I mean, wasn't there a battle?
Why is he called Caspian the Conqueror if there was nobody here to
fight with him?"

"I said there were very few _men_ in Narnia," said the Doctor, looking
at the little boy very strangely through his great spectacles.

For a moment Caspian was puzzled and then suddenly his heart gave a
leap.  "Do you mean," he gasped, "that there were other things?  Do you
mean it was like in the stories?  Were there----?"

"Hush!" said Doctor Cornelius, laying his head very close to Caspian's.
"Not a word more.  Don't you know your nurse was sent away for telling
you about Old Narnia?  The King doesn't like it.  If he found me
telling you secrets, you'd be whipped and I should have my head cut
off."

"But why?" asked Caspian.

"It is high time we turned to Grammar now," said Doctor Cornelius, in a
loud voice.  "Will your Royal Highness be pleased to open Pulverulentus
Siccus at the fourth page of his _Grammatical Garden or the Arbour of
Accidence pleasantlie open'd to Tender Wits_?"

After that it was all nouns and verbs till lunchtime, but I don't think
Caspian learned much.  He was too excited.  He felt sure that Doctor
Cornelius would not have said so much unless he meant to tell him more
sooner or later.

In this he was not disappointed.  A few days later his Tutor said,
"To-night I am going to give you a lesson in Astronomy.  At dead of
night two noble planets, Tarva and Alambil, will pass within one degree
of each other.  Such a conjunction has not occurred for two hundred
years, and your Highness will not live to see it again.  It will be
best if you go to bed a little earlier than usual.  When the time of
the conjunction draws near I will come and wake you."

This didn't seem to have anything to do with Old Narnia, which was what
Caspian really wanted to hear about, but getting up in the middle of
the night is always interesting and he was moderately pleased.  When he
went to bed that night, he thought at first that he would not be able
to sleep; but he soon dropped off and it seemed only a few minutes
before he felt someone gently shaking him.

He sat up in bed and saw that the room was full of moonlight.  Doctor
Cornelius, muffled in a hooded robe and holding a small lamp in his
hand, stood by the bedside.  Caspian remembered at once what they were
going to do.  He got up and put on some clothes.  Although it was a
summer night he felt colder than he had expected and was quite glad
when the Doctor wrapped him in a robe like his own and gave him a pair
of warm, soft buskins for his feet.  A moment later, both muffled so
that they could hardly be seen in the dark corridors, and both shod so
that they made almost no noise, master and pupil left the room.

Caspian followed the Doctor through many passages and up several
staircases, and at last, through a little door in a turret, they came
out upon the leads.  On one side were the battlements, on the other a
steep roof; below them, all shadowy and shimmery, the castle gardens;
above them, stars and moon.  Presently they came to another door, which
led into the great central tower of the whole castle: Doctor Cornelius
unlocked it and they began to climb the dark winding stair of the
tower.  Caspian was becoming excited; he had never been allowed up this
stair before.

It was long and steep, but when they came out on the roof of the tower
and Caspian had got his breath, he felt that it had been well worth it.
Away on his right he could see, rather indistinctly, the Western
Mountains.  On his left was the gleam of the Great River, and
everything was so quiet that he could hear the sound of the waterfall
at Beaversdam, a mile away.  There was no difficulty in picking out the
two stars they had come to see.  They hung rather low in the southern
sky, almost as bright as two little moons and very close together.

"Are they going to have a collision?" he asked in an awe-struck voice.

"Nay, dear Prince," said the Doctor (and he too spoke in a whisper).
"The great lords of the upper sky know the steps of their dance too
well for that.  Look well upon them.  Their meeting is fortunate and
means some great good for the sad realm of Narnia.  Tarva, the Lord of
Victory, salutes Alambil, the Lady of Peace.  They are just coming to
their nearest."

"It's a pity that tree gets in the way," said Caspian.  "We'd really
see better from the West Tower, though it is not so high."

Doctor Cornelius said nothing for about two minutes, but stood still
with his eyes fixed on Tarva and Alambil.  Then he drew a deep breath
and turned to Caspian.

"There," he said.  "You have seen what no man now alive has seen, nor
will see again.  And you are right.  We should have seen it even better
from the smaller tower.  I brought you here for another reason."

Caspian looked up at him, but the Doctor's hood concealed most of his
face.

"The virtue of this tower," said Doctor Cornelius, "is that we have six
empty rooms beneath us, and a long stair, and the door at the bottom of
the stair is locked.  We cannot be overheard."

"Are you going to tell me what you wouldn't tell me the other day?"
said Caspian.

"I am," said the Doctor.  "But remember.  You and I must never talk
about these things except here--on the very top of the Great Tower."

"No.  That's a promise," said Caspian.  "But do go on please."

"Listen," said the Doctor.  "All you have heard about Old Narnia is
true.  It is not the land of Men.  It is the country of Aslan, the
country of the Waking Trees and Visible Naiads, of Fauns and Satyrs, of
Dwarfs and Giants, of the gods and the Centaurs, of Talking Beasts.  It
was against these that the first Caspian fought.  It is you Telmarines
who silenced the beasts and the trees and the fountains, and who killed
and drove away the Dwarfs and Fauns, and are now trying to cover up
even the memory of them.  The King does not allow them to be spoken of."

"Oh, I do wish we hadn't," said Caspian.  "And I _am_ glad it was all
true, even if it is all over."

"Many of your race wish that in secret," said Doctor Cornelius.

"But, Doctor," said Caspian, "why do you say _my_ race?  After all, I
suppose you're a Telmarine too."

"Am I?" said the Doctor.

"Well, you're a Man anyway," said Caspian.

"Am I?" repeated the Doctor in a deeper voice, at the same moment
throwing back his hood so that Caspian could see his face clearly in
the moonlight.

All at once Caspian realised the truth and felt that he ought to have
realised it long before.  Doctor Cornelius was so small, and so fat,
and had such a very long beard.  Two thoughts came into his head at the
same moment.  One was a thought of terror--"He's not a real man, not a
man at all, he's a _Dwarf_, and he's brought me up here to kill me."
The other was sheer delight--"There are real Dwarfs still, and I've
seen one at last."

"So you've guessed it in the end," said Doctor Cornelius.  "Or guessed
it nearly right.  I'm not a pure Dwarf.  I have human blood in me too.
Many Dwarfs escaped in the great battles and lived on, shaving their
beards and wearing high-heeled shoes and pretending to be men.  They
have mixed with your Telmarines.  I am one of those, only a half-Dwarf,
and if any of my kindred, the true Dwarfs, are still alive anywhere in
the world, doubtless they would despise me and call me a traitor.  But
never in all these years have we forgotten our own people and all the
other happy creatures of Narnia, and the long-lost days of freedom."

"I'm--I'm sorry, Doctor," said Caspian.  "It wasn't my fault, you know."

"I am not saying these things in blame of you, dear Prince," answered
the Doctor.  "You may well ask why I say them at all.  But I have two
reasons.  Firstly, because my old heart has carried these secret
memories so long that it aches with them and would burst if I did not
whisper them to you.  But secondly, for this: that when you become King
you may help us, for I know that you also, Telmarine though you are,
love the Old Things."

"I do, I do," said Caspian.  "But how can I help?"

"You can be kind to the poor remnants of the Dwarf people, like myself.
You can gather learned magicians and try to find a way of awaking the
trees once more.  You can search through all the nooks and wild places
of the land to see if any Fauns or Talking Beasts or Dwarfs are perhaps
still alive in hiding."

"Do you think there are any?" asked Caspian eagerly.

"I don't know--I don't know," said the Doctor with a deep sigh.
"Sometimes I am afraid there can't be.  I have been looking for traces
of them all my life.  Sometimes I have thought I heard a Dwarf-drum in
the mountains.  Sometimes at night, in the woods, I thought I had
caught a glimpse of Fauns and Satyrs dancing a long way off; but when I
came to the place, there was never anything there.  I have often
despaired; but something always happens to start me hoping again.  I
don't know.  But at least you can try to be a King like the High King
Peter of old, and not like your uncle."

"Then it's true about the Kings and Queens too, and about the White
Witch?" said Caspian.

"Certainly it is true," said Cornelius.  "Their reign was the Golden
Age in Narnia and the land has never forgotten them."

"Did they live in this castle, Doctor?"

"Nay, my dear," said the old man.  "This castle is a thing of
yesterday.  Your great-great-grandfather built it.  But when the two
sons of Adam and the two daughters of Eve were made Kings and Queens of
Narnia by Aslan himself, they lived in the castle of Cair Paravel.  No
man alive has seen that blessed place and perhaps even the ruins of it
have now vanished.  But we believe it was far from here, down at the
mouth of the Great River, on the very shore of the sea."

"Ugh!" said Caspian with a shudder.  "Do you mean in the Black Woods?
Where all the--the--you know, the ghosts live?"

"Your Highness speaks as you have been taught," said the Doctor.  "But
it is all lies.  There are no ghosts there.  That is a story invented
by the Telmarines.  Your Kings are in deadly fear of the sea because
they can never quite forget that in all stories Aslan comes from over
the sea.  They don't want to go near it and they don't want anyone else
to go near it.  So they have let great woods grow up to cut their
people off from the coast.  But because they have quarrelled with the
trees they are afraid of the woods.  And because they are afraid of the
woods they imagine that they are full of ghosts.  And the Kings and
great men, hating both the sea and the wood, partly believe these
stories, and partly encourage them.  They feel safer if no one in
Narnia dares to go down to the coast and look out to sea--towards
Aslan's land and the morning and the eastern end of the world."

There was a deep silence between them for a few minutes.  Then Doctor
Cornelius said, "Come.  We have been here long enough.  It is time to
go down and to bed."

"Must we?" said Caspian.  "I'd like to go on talking about these things
for hours and hours and hours."

"Someone might begin looking for us, if we did that," said Doctor
Cornelius.




_Chapter V_

CASPIAN'S ADVENTURE IN THE MOUNTAINS

After this, Caspian and his Tutor had many more secret conversations on
the top of the Great Tower, and at each conversation Caspian learned
more about Old Narnia, so that thinking and dreaming about the old
days, and longing that they might come back, filled nearly all his
spare hours.  But of course he had not many hours to spare, for now his
education was beginning in earnest.  He learned sword-fighting and
riding, swimming and diving, how to shoot with the bow and play on the
recorder and the theorbo, how to hunt the stag and cut him up when he
was dead, besides Cosmography, Rhetoric, Heraldry, Versification, and
of course History, with a little Law, Physic, Alchemy and Astronomy.
Of Magic he learned only the theory, for Doctor Cornelius said the
practical part was not a proper study for princes.  "And I myself," he
added, "am only a very imperfect magician and can do only the smallest
experiments."  Of Navigation ("Which is a noble and heroical art," said
the Doctor) he was taught nothing, because King Miraz disapproved of
ships and the sea.

He also learned a great deal by using his own eyes and ears.  As a
little boy he had often wondered why he disliked his aunt, Queen
Prunaprismia; he now saw that it was because she disliked him.  He also
began to see that Narnia was an unhappy country.  The taxes were high
and the laws were stern and Miraz was a cruel man.

After some years there came a time when the Queen seemed to be ill and
there was a great deal of bustle and pother about her in the castle and
doctors came and the courtiers whispered.  This was in early
summertime.  And one night, while all this fuss was going on, Caspian
was unexpectedly wakened by Doctor Cornelius after he had been only a
few hours in bed.

"Are we going to do a little Astronomy, Doctor?" said Caspian.

"Hush!" said the Doctor.  "Trust me and do exactly as I tell you.  Put
on all your clothes; you have a long journey before you."

Caspian was very surprised, but he had learned to have confidence in
his Tutor and he began doing what he was told at once.  When he was
dressed the Doctor said, "I have a wallet for you.  We must go into the
next room and fill it with victuals from your Highness's supper table."

"My gentlemen-in-waiting will be there," said Caspian.

"They are fast asleep and will not wake," said the Doctor.  "I am a
very minor magician but I can at least contrive a charmed sleep."

They went into the antechamber and there, sure enough, the two
gentlemen-in-waiting were, sprawling on chairs and snoring hard.
Doctor Cornelius quickly cut up the remains of a cold chicken and some
slices of venison and put them, with bread and an apple or so and a
little flask of good wine, into the wallet which he then gave to
Caspian.  It fitted on by a strap over Caspian's shoulder, like a
satchel you would use for taking books to school.

"Have you your sword?" asked the Doctor.

"Yes," said Caspian.

"Then put this mantle over all to hide the sword and the wallet.
That's right.  And now we must go to the Great Tower and talk."

When they had reached the top of the Tower (it was a cloudy night, not
at all like the night when they had seen the conjunction of Tarva and
Alambil) Doctor Cornelius said,

"Dear Prince, you must leave this castle at once and go to seek your
fortune in the wide world.  Your life is in danger here."

"Why?  asked Caspian.

"Because you are the true King of Narnia: Caspian the Tenth, the true
son and heir of Caspian the Ninth.  Long life to your Majesty"--and
suddenly, to Caspian's great surprise, the little man dropped down on
one knee and kissed his hand.

"What does it all mean?  I don't understand," said Caspian.

"I wonder you have never asked me before," said the Doctor, "why, being
the son of King Caspian, you are not King Caspian yourself.  Everyone
except your Majesty knows that Miraz is a usurper.  When he first began
to rule he did not even pretend to be the King: he called himself Lord
Protector.  But then your royal mother died, the good Queen and the
only Telmarine who was ever kind to me.  And then, one by one, all the
great lords, who had known your father, died or disappeared.  Not by
accident, either.  Miraz weeded them out.  Belisar and Uvilas were shot
with arrows on a hunting party: by chance, it was pretended.  All the
great house of the Passarids he sent to fight giants on the northern
frontier till one by one they fell.  Arlian and Erimon and a dozen more
he executed for treason on a false charge.  The two brothers of
Beaversdam he shut up as madmen.  And finally he persuaded the seven
noble lords, who alone among all the Telmarines did not fear the sea,
to sail away and look for new lands beyond the Eastern Ocean, and, as
he intended, they never came back.  And when there was no one left who
could speak a word for you, then his flatterers (as he had instructed
them) begged him to become King.  And of course he did."

"Do you mean he now wants to kill me too?" said Caspian.

"That is almost certain," said Doctor Cornelius.

"But why now?" said Caspian.  "I mean, why didn't he do it long ago if
he wanted to?  And what harm have I done him?"

"He has changed his mind about you because of something that happened
only two hours ago.  The Queen has had a son."

"I don't see what that's got to do with it," said Caspian.

"Don't see!" exclaimed the Doctor.  "Have all my lessons in History and
Politics taught you no more than that?  Listen.  As long as he had no
children of his own, he was willing enough that you should be King
after he died.  He may not have cared much about you, but he would
rather you should have the throne than a stranger.  Now that he has a
son of his own he will want his own son to be the next King.  You are
in the way.  He'll clear you out of the way."

"Is he really as bad as that?" said Caspian.  "Would he really murder
me?"

"He murdered your Father," said Doctor Cornelius.

Caspian felt very queer and said nothing.

"I can tell you the whole story," said the Doctor.  "But not now.
There is no time.  You must fly at once."

"You'll come with me?" said Caspian.

"I dare not," said the Doctor.  "It would make your danger greater.
Two are more easily tracked than one.  Dear Prince, dear King Caspian,
you must be very brave.  You must go alone and at once.  Try to get
across the southern border to the court of King Nain of Archenland.  He
will be good to you."

"Shall I never see you again?" said Caspian in a quavering voice.

"I hope so, dear King," said the Doctor.  "What friend have I in the
wide world except your Majesty?  And I have a little magic.  But in the
meantime, speed is everything.  Here are two gifts before you go.  This
is a little purse of gold--alas, all the treasure in this castle should
be your own by rights.  And here is something far better."

He put in Caspian's hands something which he could hardly see but which
he knew by the feel to be a horn.

"That," said Doctor Cornelius, "is the greatest and most sacred
treasure of Narnia.  Many terrors I endured, many spells did I utter,
to find it, when I was still young.  It is the magic horn of Queen
Susan herself which she left behind her when she vanished from Narnia
at the end of the Golden Age.  It is said that whoever blows it shall
have strange help--no one can say how strange.  It may have power to
call Queen Lucy and King Edmund and Queen Susan and the High King Peter
back from the past, and they will set all to rights.  It may be that it
will call up Aslan himself.  Take it, King Caspian: but do not use it
except at your greatest need.  And now, haste, haste, haste.  The
little door at the very bottom of the Tower, the door into the garden,
is unlocked.  There we must part."

"Can't I get my horse Destrier?" said Caspian.

"He is already saddled and waiting for you just at the corner of the
orchard."

During the long climb down the winding staircase Cornelius whispered
many more words of direction and advice.  Caspian's heart was sinking,
but he tried to take it all in.  Then came the fresh air in the garden,
a fervent handclasp with the Doctor, a run across the lawn, a welcoming
whinny from Destrier, and so King Caspian the Tenth left the castle of
his fathers.  Looking back, he saw fireworks going up to celebrate the
birth of the new prince.

All night he rode southward, choosing by-ways and bridle paths through
woods as long as he was in country that he knew; but afterwards he kept
to the high road.  Destrier was as excited as his master at this
unusual journey, and Caspian, though tears had come into his eyes at
saying good-bye to Doctor Cornelius, felt brave and, in a way, happy,
to think that he was King Caspian riding to seek adventures, with his
sword on his left hip and Queen Susan's magic horn on his right.  But
when day came, with a sprinkle of rain, and he looked about him and saw
on every side unknown woods, wild heaths and blue mountains, he thought
how large and strange the world was and felt frightened and small.

As soon as it was full daylight he left the road and found an open
grassy place amid a wood where he could rest.  He took off Destrier's
bridle and let him graze, ate some cold chicken and drank a little
wine, and presently fell asleep.  It was late afternoon when he awoke.
He ate a morsel and continued his journey, still southward, by many
unfrequented lanes.  He was now in a land of hills, going up and down,
but always more up than down.  From every ridge he could see the
mountains growing bigger and blacker ahead.  As the evening closed in,
he was riding their lower slopes.  The wind rose.  Soon rain fell in
torrents.  Destrier became uneasy; there was thunder in the air.  And
now they entered a dark and seemingly endless pine forest, and all the
stories Caspian had ever heard of trees being unfriendly to Man crowded
into his mind.  He remembered that he was, after all, a Telmarine, one
of the race who cut down trees wherever they could and were at war with
all wild things; and though he himself might be unlike other
Telmarines, the trees could not be expected to know this.

Nor did they.  The wind became a tempest, the woods roared and creaked
all round him.  There came a crash.  A tree fell right across the road
just behind him.  "Quiet, Destrier, quiet!" said Caspian, patting his
horse's neck; but he was trembling himself and knew that he had escaped
death by an inch.  Lightning flashed and a great crack of thunder
seemed to break the sky in two just overhead.  Destrier bolted in good
earnest.  Caspian was a good rider, but he had not the strength to hold
him back.  He kept his seat, but he knew that his life hung by a thread
during the wild career that followed.  Tree after tree rose up before
them in the dusk and was only just avoided.  Then, almost too suddenly
to hurt (and yet it did hurt him too) something struck Caspian on the
forehead and he knew no more.


When he came to himself he was lying in a firelit place with bruised
limbs and a bad headache.  Low voices were speaking close at hand.

"And now," said one, "before it wakes up we must decide what to do with
it."

"Kill it," said another.  "We can't let it live.  It would betray us."

"We ought to have killed it at once, or else let it alone," said a
third voice.  "We can't kill it now.  Not after we've taken it in and
bandaged its head and all.  It would be murdering a guest."

"Gentlemen," said Caspian in a feeble voice, "whatever you do to me, I
hope you will be kind to my poor horse."

"Your horse had taken flight long before we found you," said the first
voice--a curiously husky, earthy voice, as Caspian now noticed.

"Now don't let it talk you round with its pretty words," said the
second voice.  "I still say----"

"Horns and halibuts!" exclaimed the third voice.  "Of course we're not
going to murder it.  For shame, Nikabrik.  What do you say,
Trufflehunter?  What shall we do with it?"

"I shall give it a drink," said the first voice, presumably
Trufflehunter's.  A dark shape approached the bed.  Caspian felt an arm
slipped gently under his shoulders--if it was exactly an arm.  The
shape somehow seemed wrong.  The face that bent towards him seemed
wrong too.  He got the impression that it was very hairy and very long
nosed, and there were odd white patches on each side of it.  "It's a
mask of some sort," thought Caspian.  "Or perhaps I'm in a fever and
imagining it all."  A cupful of something sweet and hot was set to his
lips and he drank.  At that moment one of the others poked the fire.  A
blaze sprang up and Caspian almost screamed with the shock as the
sudden light revealed the face that was looking into his own.  It was
not a man's face but a badger's, though larger and friendlier and more
intelligent than the face of any badger he had seen before.  And it had
certainly been talking.  He saw, too, that he was on a bed of heather,
in a cave.  By the fire sat two little bearded men, so much wilder and
shorter and hairier and thicker than Doctor Cornelius that he knew them
at once for real Dwarfs, ancient Dwarfs with not a drop of human blood
in their veins.  And Caspian knew that he had found the Old Narnians at
last.  Then his head began to swim again.

In the next few days he learned to know them by names.  The Badger was
called Trufflehunter; he was the oldest and kindest of the three.  The
Dwarf who had wanted to kill Caspian was a sour Black Dwarf (that is,
his hair and beard were black, and thick and hard like horse-hair).
His name was Nikabrik.  The other Dwarf was a Red Dwarf with hair
rather like a Fox's and he was called Trumpkin.

"And now," said Nikabrik on the first evening when Caspian was well
enough to sit up and talk, "we still have to decide what to do with
this Human.  You two think you've done it a great kindness by not
letting me kill it.  But I suppose the upshot is that we have to keep
it a prisoner for life.  I'm certainly not going to let it go alive--to
go back to its own kind and betray us all."

"Bulbs and bolsters!  Nikabrik," said Trumpkin.  "Why need you talk so
unhandsomely?  It isn't the creature's fault that it bashed its head
against a tree outside our hole.  And I don't think it looks like a
traitor."

"I say," said Caspian, "you haven't yet found out whether I _want_ to
go back.  I don't.  I want to stay with you--if you'll let me.  I've
been looking for people like you all my life."

"That's a likely story," growled Nikabrik.  "You're a Telmarine and a
Human, aren't you?  Of course you want to go back to your own kind."

"Well, even if I did, I couldn't," said Caspian.  "I was flying for my
life when I had my accident.  The King wants to kill me.  If you'd
killed me, you'd have done the very thing to please him."

"Well now," said Trufflehunter, "you don't say so!"

"Eh?" said Trumpkin.  "What's that?  What have you been doing, Human,
to fall foul of Miraz at your age?"

"He's my uncle," began Caspian, when Nikabrik jumped up with his hand
on his dagger.

"There you are!" he cried.  "Not only a Telmarine but close kin and
heir to our greatest enemy.  Are you still mad enough to let this
creature live?"  He would have stabbed Caspian then and there, if the
Badger and Trumpkin had not got in the way and forced him back to his
seat and held him down.

"Now, once and for all, Nikabrik," said Trumpkin.  "Will you contain
yourself, or must Trufflehunter and I sit on your head?"

Nikabrik sulkily promised to behave, and the other two asked Caspian to
tell his whole story.  When he had done so there was a moment's silence.

"This is the queerest thing I ever heard," said Trumpkin.

"I don't like it," said Nikabrik.  "I didn't know there were stories
about us still told among the Humans.  The less they know about us the
better.  That old nurse, now.  She'd better have held her tongue.  And
it's all mixed up with that Tutor: a renegade Dwarf.  I hate 'em.  I
hate 'em worse than the Humans.  You mark my words--no good will come
of it."

"Don't you go talking about things you don't understand, Nikabrik,"
said Trufflehunter.  "You Dwarfs are as forgetful and changeable as the
Humans themselves.  I'm a beast, I am, and a Badger what's more.  We
don't change.  We hold on.  I say great good will come of it.  This is
the true King of Narnia we've got here: a true King, coming back to
true Narnia.  And we beasts remember, even if Dwarfs forget, that
Narnia was never right except when a son of Adam was King."

"Whistles and whirligigs!  Trufflehunter," said Trumpkin.  "You don't
mean you want to give the country to Humans?"

"I said nothing about that," answered the Badger.  "It's not Men's
country (who should know that better than me?) but it's a country for a
man to be King of.  We badgers have long enough memories to know that.
Why, bless us all, wasn't the High King Peter a Man?"

"Do you believe all those old stories?" asked Trumpkin.

"I tell you, we don't change, we beasts," said Trufflehunter.  "We
don't forget.  I believe in the High King Peter and the rest that
reigned at Cair Paravel, as firmly as I believe in Aslan himself."

"As firmly as _that_, I dare say," said Trumpkin.  "But who believes in
Aslan nowadays?"

"I do," said Caspian.  "And if I hadn't believed in him before, I would
now.  Back there among the Humans the people who laughed at Aslan would
have laughed at stories about Talking Beasts and Dwarfs.  Sometimes I
did wonder if there really was such a person as Aslan: but then
sometimes I wondered if there were really people like you.  Yet there
you are."

"That's right," said Trufflehunter.  "You're right, King Caspian.  And
as long as you will be true to Old Narnia you shall be _my_ King,
whatever they say.  Long life to your Majesty."

"You make me sick, Badger," growled Nikabrik.  "The High King Peter and
the rest may have been Men, but they were a different sort of Men.
This is one of the cursed Telmarines.  He has _hunted_ beasts for
sport.  Haven't you, now?" he added, rounding suddenly on Caspian.

"Well, to tell you the truth, I have," said Caspian.  "But they weren't
Talking Beasts."

"It's all the same thing," said Nikabrik.

"No, no, no," said Trufflehunter.  "You know it isn't.  You know very
well that the beasts in Narnia nowadays are different and are no more
than the poor dumb, witless creatures you'd find in Kalormen or Telmar.
They're smaller too.  They're far more different from us than the
half-Dwarfs are from you."

There was a great deal more talk, but it all ended with the agreement
that Caspian should stay and even the promise that, as soon as he was
able to go out, he should be taken to see what Trumpkin called "the
Others"; for apparently in these wild parts all sorts of creatures from
the Old Days of Narnia still lived on in hiding.




_Chapter VI_

THE PEOPLE THAT LIVED IN HIDING

Now began the happiest times that Caspian had ever known.  On a fine
summer morning when the dew lay on the grass he set off with the Badger
and the two Dwarfs, up through the forest to a high saddle in the
mountains and down on to their sunny southern slopes where one looked
across the green wolds of Archenland.

"We will go first to the Three Bulgy Bears," said Trumpkin.

They came in a glade to an old hollow oak tree covered with moss, and
Trufflehunter tapped with his paw three times on the trunk and there
was no answer.  Then he tapped again and a woolly sort of voice from
inside said, "Go away.  It's not time to get up yet."  But when he
tapped the third time there was a noise like a small earthquake from
inside and a sort of door opened and out came three brown bears, very
bulgy indeed and blinking their little eyes.  And when everything had
been explained to them (which took a long time because they were so
sleepy) they said, just as Trufflehunter had said, that a son of Adam
ought to be King of Narnia and all kissed Caspian--very wet, snuffly
kisses they were--and offered him some honey.  Caspian did not really
want honey, without bread, at that time in the morning, but he thought
it polite to accept It took him a long time afterwards to get unsticky.

After that they went on till they came among tall beech trees and
Trufflehunter called out, "Pattertwig!  Pattertwig!  Pattertwig!" and
almost at once, bounding down from branch to branch till he was just
above their heads, came the most magnificent red squirrel that Caspian
had ever seen.  He was far bigger than the ordinary dumb squirrels
which he had sometimes seen in the castle gardens; indeed he was nearly
the size of a terrier and the moment you looked in his face you saw
that he could talk.  Indeed the difficulty was to get him to stop
talking, for, like all squirrels, he was a chatterer.  He welcomed
Caspian at once and asked if he would like a nut and Caspian said
thanks, he would.  But as Pattertwig went bounding away to fetch it,
Trufflehunter whispered in Caspian's ear, "Don't look.  Look the other
way.  It's very bad manners among squirrels to watch anyone going to
his store or to look as if you wanted to know where it was."  Then
Pattertwig came back with the nut and Caspian ate it and after that
Pattertwig asked if he could take any messages to other friends.  "For
I can go nearly everywhere without setting foot to ground," he said.
Trufflehunter and the Dwarfs thought this a very good idea and gave
Pattertwig messages to all sorts of people with queer names telling
them all to come to a feast and council on Dancing Lawn at midnight
three nights ahead.  "And you'd better tell the three Bulgies too,"
added Trumpkin.  "We forgot to mention it to them."

Their next visit was to the Seven Brothers of Shuddering Wood.
Trumpkin led the way back to the saddle and then down eastward on the
northern slope of the mountains till they came to a very solemn place
among rocks and fir trees.  They went very quietly and presently
Caspian could feel the ground shake under his feet as if someone were
hammering down below.  Trumpkin went to a flat stone about the size of
the top of a water-butt, and stamped on it with his foot.  After a long
pause it was moved away by someone or something underneath, and there
was a dark, round hole with a good deal of heat and steam coming out of
it and in the middle of the hole the head of a Dwarf very like Trumpkin
himself.  There was a long talk here and the Dwarf seemed more
suspicious than the Squirrel or the Bulgy Bears had been, but in the
end the whole party were invited to come down.  Caspian found himself
descending a dark stairway into the earth, but when he came to the
bottom he saw firelight.  It was the light of a furnace.  The whole
place was a smithy.  A subterranean stream ran past on one side of it.
Two Dwarfs were at the bellows, another was holding a piece of red-hot
metal on the anvil with a pair of tongs, a fourth was hammering it, and
two, wiping their horny little hands on a greasy cloth, were coming
forward to meet the visitors.  It took some time to satisfy them that
Caspian was a friend and not an enemy, but when they did, they all
cried, "Long live the King," and their gifts were noble--mail shirts
and helmets and swords for Caspian and Trumpkin and Nikabrik.  The
Badger could have had the same if he had liked, but he said he was a
beast, he was, and if his claws and teeth could not keep his skin
whole, it wasn't worth keeping.  The workmanship of the arms was far
finer than any Caspian had ever seen, and he gladly accepted the
Dwarf-made sword instead of his own, which looked, in comparison, as
feeble as a toy and as clumsy as a stick.  The seven brothers (who were
all Red Dwarfs) promised to come to the feast at Dancing Lawn.

A little farther on, in a dry, rocky ravine they reached the cave of
five Black Dwarfs.  They looked suspiciously at Caspian, but in the end
the eldest of them said, "If he is against Miraz, we'll have him for
King."  And the next oldest said, "Shall we go farther up for you, up
to the crags?  There's an Ogre or two and a Hag that we could introduce
you to, up there."

"Certainly not," said Caspian.

"I should think not, indeed," said Trufflehunter.  "We want none of
that sort on our side."  Nikabrik disagreed with this, but Trumpkin and
the Badger overruled him.  It gave Caspian a shock to realise that the
horrible creatures out of the old stories, as well as the nice ones,
had some descendants in Narnia still.

"We should not have Aslan for our friend if we brought in that rabble,"
said Trufflehunter as they came away from the cave of the Black Dwarfs.

"Oh, Aslan!" said Trumpkin, cheerily but contemptuously.  "What matters
much more is that you wouldn't have me."

"Do you believe in Aslan?" said Caspian to Nikabrik.

"I'll believe in anyone or anything," said Nikabrik, "that'll batter
these cursed Telmarine barbarians to pieces or drive them out of
Narnia.  Anyone or anything, Aslan _or_ the White Witch, do you
understand?"

"Silence, silence," said Trufflehunter.  "You do not know what you are
saying.  She was a worse enemy than Miraz and all his race."

"Not to Dwarfs, she wasn't," said Nikabrik.

Their next visit was a pleasanter one.  As they came lower down, the
mountains opened out into a great glen or wooded gorge with a swift
river running at the bottom.  The open places near the river's edge
were a mass of foxgloves and wild roses and the air was buzzing with
bees.  Here Trufflehunter called again, "Glenstorm!  Glenstorm!" and
after a pause Caspian heard the sound of hoofs.  It grew louder till
the valley trembled and at last, breaking and trampling the thickets,
there came in sight the noblest creatures that Caspian had yet seen,
the great Centaur Glenstorm and his three sons.  His flanks were glossy
chestnut and the beard that covered his broad chest was golden-red.  He
was a prophet and a star-gazer and knew what they had come about.

"Long live the King," he cried.  "I and my sons are ready for war.
When is the battle to be joined?"

Up till now neither Caspian nor the others had really been thinking of
a war.  They had some vague idea, perhaps, of an occasional raid on
some Human farmstead or of attacking a party of hunters, if it ventured
too far into these southern wilds.  But, in the main, they had thought
only of living to themselves in woods and caves and building up an
attempt at Old Narnia in hiding.  As soon as Glenstorm had spoken
everyone felt much more serious.

"Do you mean a real war to drive Miraz out of Narnia?" asked Caspian.

"What else?" said the Centaur.  "Why else does your Majesty go clad in
mail and girt with sword?"

"Is it possible, Glenstorm?" said the Badger.

"The time is ripe," said Glenstorm.  "I watch the skies, Badger, for it
is mine to watch, as it is yours to remember.  Tarva and Alambil have
met in the halls of high heaven, and on earth a son of Adam has once
more arisen to rule and name the creatures.  The hour has struck.  Our
council at the Dancing Lawn must be a council of war."  He spoke in
such a voice that neither Caspian nor the others hesitated for a
moment: it now seemed to them quite possible that they might win a war
and quite certain that they must wage one.

As it was now past the middle of the day, they rested with the Centaurs
and ate such food as the Centaurs provided--cakes of oaten meal, and
apples, and herbs, and wine, and cheese.

The next place they were to visit was quite near at hand, but they had
to go a long way round in order to avoid a region in which Men lived.
It was well into the afternoon before they found themselves in level
fields, warm between hedgerows.  There Trufflehunter called at the
mouth of a little hole in a green bank and out popped the last thing
Caspian expected--a Talking Mouse.  He was of course bigger than a
common mouse, well over a foot high when he stood on his hind legs, and
with ears nearly as long (though broader) than a rabbit's.  His name
was Reepicheep and he was a gay and martial mouse.  He wore a tiny
little rapier at his side and twirled his long whiskers as if they were
a moustache.  "There are twelve of us, Sire," he said with a dashing
and graceful bow, "and I place all the resources of my people
unreservedly at your Majesty's disposal."  Caspian tried hard (and
successfully) not to laugh, but he couldn't help thinking that
Reepicheep and all his people could very easily be put in a washing
basket and carried home on one's back.

It would take too long to mention all the creatures whom Caspian met
that day--Clodsley Shovel the Mole, the three Hardbiters (who were
badgers like Trufflehunter), Camillo the Hare, and Hogglestock the
Hedgehog.  They rested at last beside a well at the edge of a wide and
level circle of grass, bordered with tall elms which now threw long
shadows across it, for the sun was setting, the daisies closing, and
the rooks flying home to bed.  Here they supped on food they had
brought with them and Trumpkin lit his pipe (Nikabrik was not a smoker).

"Now," said the Badger, "if only we could wake the spirits of these
trees and this well, we should have done a good day's work."

"Can't we?" said Caspian.

"No," said Trufflehunter.  "We have no power over them.  Since the
Humans came into the land, felling forests and defiling streams, the
Dryads and Naiads have sunk into a deep sleep.  Who knows if ever they
will stir again?  And that is a great loss to our side.  The Telmarines
are horribly afraid of the woods, and once the Trees moved in anger,
our enemies would go mad with fright and be chased out of Narnia as
quick as their legs could carry them."

"What imaginations you Animals have!" said Trumpkin, who didn't believe
in such things.  "But why stop at Trees and Waters?  Wouldn't it be
even nicer if the stones started throwing themselves at old Miraz?"

The Badger only grunted at this, and after that there was such a
silence that Caspian had nearly dropped off to sleep when he thought he
heard a faint musical sound from the depth of the woods at his back.
Then he thought it was only a dream and turned over again; but as soon
as his ear touched the ground he felt or heard (it was hard to tell
which) a faint beating or drumming.  He raised his head.  The beating
noise at once became fainter, but the music returned, clearer this
time.  It was like flutes.  He saw that Trufflehunter was sitting up
staring into the wood.  The moon was bright; Caspian had been asleep
longer than he thought.  Nearer and nearer came the music, a tune wild
and yet dreamy, and the noise of many light feet, till at last, out
from the wood into the moonlight, came dancing shapes such as Caspian
had been thinking of all his life.  They were not much taller than
Dwarfs, but far slighter and more graceful.  Their curly heads had
little horns, the upper part of their bodies gleamed naked in the pale
light, but their legs and feet were those of goats.

"Fauns!" cried Caspian, jumping up, and in a moment they were all round
him.  It took next to no time to explain the whole situation to them
and they accepted Caspian at once.  Before he knew what he was doing he
found himself joining in the dance.  Trumpkin, with heavier and jerkier
movements, did likewise and even Trufflehunter hopped and lumbered
about as best he could.  Only Nikabrik stayed where he was, looking on
in silence.  The Fauns footed it all round Caspian to their reedy
pipes.  Their strange faces, which seemed mournful and merry all at
once, looked into his; dozens of Fauns, Mentius and Obentinus and
Dumnus, Voluns, Voltinus, Girbius, Nimienus, Nausus and Oscuns.
Pattertwig had sent them all.

When Caspian awoke next morning he could hardly believe that it had not
all been a dream; but the grass was covered with little cloven
hoof-marks.




_Chapter VII_

OLD NARNIA IN DANGER

The place where they had met the Fauns was, of course, Dancing Lawn
itself, and here Caspian and his friends remained till the night of the
Great Council.  To sleep under the stars, to drink nothing but well
water and to live chiefly on nuts and wild fruit, was a strange
experience for Caspian after his bed with silken sheets in a tapestried
chamber at the castle, with meals laid out on gold and silver dishes in
the ante-room, and attendants ready at his call.  But he had never
enjoyed himself more.  Never had sleep been more refreshing nor food
tasted more savoury, and he began already to harden and his face wore a
kinglier look.

When the great night came, and his various strange subjects came
stealing into the lawn by ones and twos and threes or by sixes and
sevens--the moon then shining almost at her full--his heart swelled as
he saw their numbers and heard their greetings.  All whom he had met
were there: Bulgy Bears and Red Dwarfs and Black Dwarfs, Moles and
Badgers, Hares and Hedgehogs, and others whom he had not yet seen--five
Satyrs as red as foxes, the whole contingent of Talking Mice, armed to
the teeth and following a shrill trumpet, some Owls, the Old Raven of
Ravenscaur.  Last of all (and this took Caspian's breath away), with
the Centaurs came a small but genuine Giant, Wimbleweather of Deadman's
Hill, carrying on his back a basketful of rather sea-sick Dwarfs who
had accepted his offer of a lift and were now wishing they had walked
instead.

The Bulgy Bears were very anxious to have the feast first and leave the
council till afterwards: perhaps till to-morrow.  Reepicheep and his
Mice said that councils and feasts could both wait, and proposed
storming Miraz in his own castle that very night.  Pattertwig and the
other Squirrels said they could talk and eat at the same time, so why
not have the council and feast all at once?  The Moles proposed
throwing up entrenchments round the Lawn before they did anything else.
The Fauns thought it would be better to begin with a solemn dance.  The
Old Raven, while agreeing with the Bears that it would take too long to
have a full council before supper, begged to be allowed to give a brief
address to the whole company.  But Caspian and the Centaurs and the
Dwarfs over-ruled all these suggestions and insisted on holding a real
council of war at once.

When all the other creatures had been persuaded to sit down quietly in
a great circle, and when (with more difficulty) they had got Pattertwig
to stop running to and fro and saying "Silence!  Silence, everyone, for
the King's speech," Caspian, feeling a little nervous, got up.
"Narnians!" he began, but he never got any further, for at that very
moment Camillo the Hare said, "Hush!  There's a Man somewhere near."

They were all creatures of the wild, accustomed to being hunted, and
they all became still as statues.  The beasts all turned their noses in
the direction which Camillo had indicated.

"Smells like Man and yet not quite like Man," whispered Trufflehunter.

"It's getting steadily nearer," said Camillo.

"Two badgers and you three Dwarfs, with your bow at the ready, go
softly off to meet it," said Caspian.

"We'll settle 'un," said a Black Dwarf grimly, fitting a shaft to his
bowstring.

"Don't shoot if it is alone," said Caspian.  "Catch it."

"Why?" asked the Dwarf.

"Do as you're told," said Glenstorm the Centaur.

Everyone waited in silence while the three Dwarfs and two Badgers
trotted stealthily across to the trees on the north-west side of the
Lawn.  Then came a sharp dwarfish cry, "Stop!  Who goes there?" and a
sudden spring.  A moment later a voice, which Caspian knew well, could
be heard saying, "All right, all right, I'm unarmed.  Take my wrists if
you like, worthy Badgers, but don't bite right through them.  I want to
speak to the King."

"Doctor Cornelius!" cried Caspian with joy, and rushed forward to greet
his old master.  Everyone else crowded round.

"Pah!" said Nikabrik.  "A renegade Dwarf.  A half-and-halfer!  Shall I
pass my sword through its throat?"

"Be quiet, Nikabrik," said Trumpkin.  "The creature can't help its
ancestry."

"This is my greatest friend and the saviour of my life," said Caspian.
"And anyone who doesn't like his company may leave my army: at once.
Dearest Doctor, I _am_ glad to see you again.  How ever did you find us
out?"

"By a little use of simple magic, your Majesty," said the Doctor, who
was still puffing and blowing from having walked so fast.  "But there's
no time to go into that now.  We must all fly from this place at once.
You are already betrayed and Miraz is on the move.  Before mid-day
to-morrow you will be surrounded."

"Betrayed!" said Caspian.  "And by whom?"

"Another renegade Dwarf, no doubt," said Nikabrik.

"By your horse Destrier," said Doctor Cornelius.  "The poor brute knew
no better.  When you were knocked off, of course, he went dawdling back
to his stable in the castle.  Then the secret of your flight was known.
I made myself scarce, having no wish to be questioned about it in
Miraz's torture chamber.  I had a pretty good guess from my crystal as
to where I should find you.  But all day--that was the day before
yesterday--I saw Miraz's tracking parties out in the woods.  Yesterday
I learned that his army is out.  I don't think some of
your--um--pure-blooded Dwarfs have as much woodcraft as might be
expected.  You've left tracks all over the place.  Great carelessness.
At any rate something has warned Miraz that Old Narnia is not so dead
as he had hoped, and he is on the move."

"Hurrah!" said a very shrill and small voice from somewhere at the
Doctor's feet.  "Let them come!  All I ask is that the King will put me
and my people in the front."

"What on earth?" said Doctor Cornelius.  "Has your Majesty got
grasshoppers--or mosquitoes--in your army?"  Then after stooping down
and peering carefully through his spectacles, he broke into a laugh.

"By the Lion," he swore, "it's a mouse.  Signior Mouse, I desire your
better acquaintance.  I am honoured by meeting so valiant a beast."

"My friendship you shall have, learned Man," piped Reepicheep.  "And
any Dwarf--or Giant--in the army who does not give you good language
shall have my sword to reckon with."

"Is there time for this foolery?" asked Nikabrik.  "What are our plans?
Battle or flight?"

"Battle if need be," said Trumpkin.  "But we are hardly ready for it
yet, and this is no very defensible place."

"I don't like the idea of running away," said Caspian.

"Hear him!  Hear him!" said the Bulgy Bears.  "Whatever we do, don't
let's have any _running_.  Especially not before supper; and not too
soon after it neither."

"Those who run first do not always run last," said the Centaur.  "And
why should we let the enemy choose our position instead of choosing it
ourselves?  Let us find a strong place."

"That's wise, your Majesty, that's wise," said Trufflehunter.

"But where are we to go?" asked several voices.

"Your Majesty," said Doctor Cornelius, "and all you variety of
creatures, I think we must fly east and down the river to the great
woods.  The Telmarines hate that region.  They have always been afraid
of the sea and of something that may come over the sea.  That is why
they have let the great woods grow up.  If traditions speak true, the
ancient Cair Paravel was at the river-mouth.  All that part is friendly
to us and hateful to our enemies.  We must go to Aslan's How."

"Aslan's How?" said several voices.  "We do not know what it is."

"It lies within the skirts of the Great Woods and it is a huge mound
which Narnians raised in very ancient times over a very magical place,
where there stood--and perhaps still stands--a very magical Stone.  The
Mound is all hollowed out within into galleries and caves, and the
Stone is in the central cave of all.  There is room in the mound for
all our stores, and those of us who have most need of cover and are
most accustomed to underground life can be lodged in the caves.  The
rest of us can lie in the wood.  At a pinch all of us (except this
worthy Giant) could retreat into the Mound itself, and there we should
be beyond the reach of every danger except famine."

"It is a good thing we have a learned man among us," said
Trufflehunter; but Trumpkin muttered under his breath, "Soup and
celery!  I wish our leaders would think less about these old wives'
tales and more about victuals and arms."  But all approved of
Cornelius's proposal and that very night, half an hour later, they were
on the march.  Before sunrise they arrived at Aslan's How.

It was certainly an awesome place, a round green hill on top of another
hill, long since grown over with trees, and one little, low doorway
leading into it.  The tunnels inside were a perfect maze till you got
to know them, and they were lined and roofed with smooth stones, and on
the stones, peering in the twilight, Caspian saw strange characters and
snaky patterns, and pictures in which the form of a Lion was repeated
again and again.  It all seemed to belong to an even older Narnia than
the Narnia of which his nurse had told him.

It was after they had taken up their quarters in and around the How
that fortune began to turn against them.  King Miraz's scouts soon
found their new lair, and he and his army arrived on the edge of the
woods.  And as so often happens, the enemy turned out stronger than
they had reckoned.  Caspian's heart sank as he saw company after
company arriving.  And though Miraz's men may have been afraid of going
into the wood, they were even more afraid of Miraz, and with him in
command they carried battle deeply into it and sometimes almost to the
How itself.  Caspian and other captains of course made many sorties
into the open country.  Thus there was fighting on most days and
sometimes by night as well; but Caspian's party had on the whole the
worst of it.

At last there came a night when everything had gone as badly as
possible, and the rain which had been falling heavily all day had
ceased at nightfall only to give place to raw cold.  That morning
Caspian had arranged what was his biggest battle yet, and all had hung
their hopes on it.  He, with most of the Dwarfs, was to have fallen on
the King's right wing at daybreak, and then, when they were heavily
engaged, Giant Wimbleweather, with the Centaurs and some of the
fiercest beasts, was to have broken out from another place and
endeavoured to cut the King's right off from the rest of the army.  But
it had all failed.  No one had warned Caspian (because no one in these
later days of Narnia remembered) that Giants are not at all clever.
Poor Wimbleweather, though as brave as a lion, was a true Giant in that
respect.  He had broken out at the wrong time and from the wrong place,
and both his party and Caspian's had suffered badly and done the enemy
little harm.  The best of the Bears had been hurt, a Centaur terribly
wounded, and there were few in Caspian's party who had not lost blood.
It was a gloomy company that huddled under the dripping trees to eat
their scanty supper.

The gloomiest of all was Giant Wimbleweather.  He knew it was all his
fault.  He sat in silence shedding big tears which collected on the end
of his nose and then fell off with a huge splash on the whole bivouac
of the Mice, who had just been beginning to get warm and drowsy.  They
all jumped up, shaking the water out of their ears and wringing their
little blankets, and asked the Giant in shrill but forcible voices
whether he thought they weren't wet enough without this sort of thing.
And then other people woke up and told the Mice they had been enrolled
as scouts and not as a concert party, and asked why they couldn't keep
quiet.  And Wimbleweather tiptoed away to find some place where he
could be miserable in peace and stepped on somebody's tail and somebody
(they said afterwards it was a fox) bit him.  And so everyone was out
of temper.

But in the secret and magical chamber at the heart of the How, King
Caspian, with Cornelius and the Badger and Nikabrik and Trumpkin, were
at council.  Thick pillars of ancient workmanship supported the roof.
In the centre was the Stone itself--a stone table, split right down the
centre, and covered with what had once been writing of some kind: but
ages of wind and rain and snow had almost worn them away in old times
when the Stone Table had stood on the hilltop, and the Mound had not
yet been built above it.  They were not using the Table nor sitting
round it: it was too magic a thing for any common use.  They sat on
logs a little way from it, and between them was a rough wooden table,
on which stood a rude clay lamp lighting up their pale faces and
throwing big shadows on the walls.

"If your Majesty is ever to use the Horn," said Trufflehunter, "I think
the time has now come."  Caspian had of course told them of this
treasure several days ago.

"We are certainly in great need," answered Caspian.  "But it is hard to
be sure we are at our greatest.  Supposing there came an even worse
need and we had already used it?"

"By that argument," said Nikabrik, "your Majesty will never use it
until it is too late."

"I agree with that," said Doctor Cornelius.

"And what do you think, Trumpkin?" asked Caspian.

"Oh, as for me," said the Red Dwarf, who had been listening with
complete indifference, "your Majesty knows I think the Horn--and that
bit of broken stone over there--and your great King Peter--and your
Lion Aslan--are all eggs in moonshine.  It's all one to me when your
Majesty blows the Horn.  All I insist is that the army is told nothing
about it.  There's no good raising hopes of magical help which (as I
think) are sure to be disappointed."

"Then in the name of Aslan we will wind Queen Susan's Horn," said
Caspian.

"There is one thing, Sire," said Doctor Cornelius, "that should perhaps
be done first.  We do not know what form the help will take.  It might
call Aslan himself from oversea.  But I think it is more likely to call
Peter the High King and his mighty consorts down from the high past.
But in either case, I do not think we can be sure that the help will
come to this very spot----"

"You never said a truer word," put in Trumpkin.

"I think," went on the learned man, "that they--or he--will come back
to one or other of the Ancient Places of Narnia.  This, where we now
sit, is the most ancient and most deeply magical of all, and here, I
think, the answer is likeliest to come.  But there are two others.  One
is Lantern Waste, up-river, west of Beaversdam, where the Royal
Children first appeared in Narnia, as the records tell.  The other is
down at the river-mouth, where their castle of Cair Paravel once stood.
And if Aslan himself comes, that would be the best place for meeting
him too, for every story says that he is the son of the great
Emperor-over-Sea, and over the sea he will pass.  I should like very
much to send messengers to both places, to Lantern Waste and the
river-mouth, to receive them--or him--or it."

"Just as I thought," muttered Trumpkin.  "The first result of all this
foolery is not to bring us help but to lose us two fighters."

"Who would you think of sending, Doctor Cornelius?" asked Caspian.

"Squirrels are best for getting through enemy country without being
caught," said Trufflehunter.

"All our squirrels (and we haven't many)," said Nikabrik, "are rather
flighty.  The only one I'd trust on a job like that would be
Pattertwig."

"Let it be Pattertwig, then," said King Caspian.  "And who for our
other messenger?  I know you'd go, Trufflehunter, but you haven't the
speed.  Nor you, Doctor Cornelius."

"I won't go," said Nikabrik.  "With all these Humans and beasts about,
there must be a Dwarf here to see that the Dwarfs are fairly treated."

"Thimbles and thunderstorms!" cried Trumpkin in a rage.  "Is that how
you speak to the King?  Send me, Sire, I'll go."

"But I thought you didn't believe in the Horn, Trumpkin," said Caspian.

"No more I do, your Majesty.  But what's that got to do with it?  I
might as well die on a wild goose chase as die here.  You are my King.
I know the difference between giving advice and taking orders.  You've
had my advice, and now it's the time for orders."

"I will never forget this, Trumpkin," said Caspian.  "Send for
Pattertwig, one of you.  And when shall I blow the Horn?"

"I would wait for sunrise, your Majesty," said Doctor Cornelius.  "That
sometimes has an effect in operations of White Magic."

A few minutes later Pattertwig arrived and had his task explained to
him.  As he was, like many squirrels, full of courage and dash and
energy and excitement and mischief (not to say conceit), he no sooner
heard it than he was eager to be off.  It was arranged that he should
run for Lantern Waste while Trumpkin made the shorter journey to the
river-mouth.  After a hasty meal they both set off with the fervent
thanks and good wishes of the King, the Badger, and Cornelius.




_Chapter VIII_

HOW THEY LEFT THE ISLAND

"and so," said Trumpkin (for, as you have realised, it was he who had
been telling all this story to the four children, sitting on the grass
in the ruined hall of Cair Paravel)--"and so I put a crust or two in my
pocket, left behind all weapons but my dagger, and took to the woods in
the grey of the morning.  I'd been plugging away for many hours when
there came a sound that I'd never heard the like of in my born days.
Eh, I won't forget that.  The whole air was full of it, loud as thunder
but far longer, cool and sweet as music over water, but strong enough
to shake the woods.  And I said to myself, 'If that's not the Horn,
call me a rabbit.'  And a moment later I wondered why he hadn't blown
it sooner----"

"What time was it?" asked Edmund.

"Between nine and ten of the clock," said Trumpkin.

"Just when we were at the railway station!" said all the children, and
looked at one another with shining eyes.

"Please go on," said Lucy to the Dwarf.

"Well, as I was saying, I wondered, but I went on as hard as I could
pelt.  I kept on all night--and then, when it was half light this
morning, as if I'd no more sense than a Giant, I risked a short cut
across open country to cut off a big loop of the river, and was caught.
Not by the army, but by a pompous old fool who has charge of a little
castle which is Miraz's last stronghold towards the coast.  I needn't
tell you they got no true tale out of me, but I was a Dwarf and that
was enough.  But, lobsters and lollipops! it is a good thing the
seneschal _was_ a pompous fool.  Anyone else would have run me through
there and then.  But nothing would do for him short of a grand
execution: sending me down 'to the ghosts' in the full ceremonial way.
And then this young lady" (he nodded at Susan) "does her bit of
archery--and it was pretty shooting, let me tell you--and here we are.
And without my armour, for of course they took that."  He knocked out
and refilled his pipe.

"Great Scott!" said Peter.  "So it was the horn--your own horn,
Su--that dragged us all off that seat on the platform yesterday
morning!  I can hardly believe it; yet it all fits in."

"I don't know why you shouldn't believe it," said Lucy, "if you believe
in magic at all.  Aren't there lots of stories about magic forcing
people out of one place--out of one world--into another?  I mean, when
a magician in _The Arabian Nights_ calls up a Jinn, it has to come.  We
had to come, just like that."

"Yes," said Peter, "I suppose what makes it feel so queer is that in
the stories it's always someone in our world who does the calling.  One
doesn't really think about where the Jinn's coming _from_."

"And now we know what it feels like for the Jinn," said Edmund with a
chuckle.  "Golly!  It's a bit uncomfortable to know that _we_ can be
whistled for like that.  It's worse than what Father says about living
at the mercy of the telephone."

"But we want to be here, don't we," said Lucy, "if Aslan wants us?"

"Meanwhile," said the Dwarf, "what are we to do?  I suppose I'd better
go back to King Caspian and tell him no help has come."

"No help?" said Susan.  "But it has worked.  And here we are."

"Um--um--yes, to be sure.  I see that," said the Dwarf, whose pipe
seemed to be blocked (at any rate he made himself very busy cleaning
it).  "But--well--I mean----"

"But don't you yet see who we are?" shouted Lucy.  "You _are_ stupid."

"I suppose you are the four children out of the old stories," said
Trumpkin.  "And I'm very glad to meet you of course.  And it's very
interesting, no doubt.  But--no offence?"--and he hesitated again.

"Do get on and say whatever you're going to say," said Edmund.

"Well, then--no offence," said Trumpkin.  "But, you know, the King and
Trufflehunter and Doctor Cornelius were expecting--well, if you see
what I mean, help.  To put it in another way, I think they'd been
imagining you as great warriors.  As it is--we're awfully fond of
children and all that, but just at the moment, in the middle of a
war--but I'm sure you understand."

"You mean you think we're no good," said Edmund, getting red in the
face.

"Now pray don't be offended," interrupted the Dwarf.  "I assure you, my
dear little friends----"

"_Little_ from you is really a bit too much," said Edmund, jumping up.
"I suppose you don't believe we won the Battle of Beruna?  Well, you
can say what you like about me because I know----"

"There's no good losing our tempers," said Peter.  "Let's fit him out
with fresh armour and fit ourselves out from the treasure chamber, and
have a talk after that."

"I don't quite see the point----" began Edmund, but Lucy whispered in
his ear, "Hadn't we better do what Peter says?  He is the High King,
you know.  And I think he has an idea."  So Edmund agreed and by the
aid of his torch they all, including Trumpkin, went down the steps
again into the dark coldness and dusty splendour of the treasure house.

The Dwarf's eyes glistened as he saw the wealth that lay on the shelves
(though it had to stand on tiptoes to do so) and he muttered to
himself, "It would never do to let Nikabrik see this; never."  They
found easily enough a mail shirt for him, a sword, a helmet, a shield,
a bow and quiverful of arrows, all of dwarfish size.  The helmet was of
copper, set with rubies, and there was gold on the hilt of the sword:
Trumpkin had never seen, much less carried, so much wealth in all his
life.  The children also put on mail shirts and helmets; a sword and
shield were found for Edmund and a bow for Lucy--Peter and Susan were
of course already carrying their gifts.  As they came back up the
stairway, jingling in their mail, and already looking and feeling more
like Narnians and less like school-children, the two boys were behind,
apparently making some plan.  Lucy heard Edmund say, "No, let me do it.
It will be more of a sucks for him if I win, and less of a let-down for
us all if I fail."

"All right, Ed," said Peter.

When they came out into the daylight Edmund turned to the Dwarf very
politely and said, "I've got something to ask you.  Kids like us don't
often have the chance of meeting a great warrior like you.  Would you
have a little fencing match with me?  It would be frightfully decent."

"But, lad," said Trumpkin, "these swords are sharps."

"I know," said Edmund.  "But I'll never get anywhere near you and
you'll be quite clever enough to disarm me without doing me any damage."

"It's a dangerous game," said Trumpkin.  "But since you make such a
point of it, I'll try a pass or two."

Both swords were out in a moment and the three others jumped off the
dais and stood watching.  It was well worth it.  It was not like the
silly fighting you see with broad swords on the stage.  It was not even
like the rapier fighting which you sometimes see rather better done.
This was real broad-sword fighting.  The great thing is to slash at
your enemy's legs and feet because they are the part that have no
armour.  And when he slashes at yours you jump with both feet off the
ground so that his blow goes under them.  This gave the Dwarf an
advantage because Edmund, being much taller, had to be always stooping.
I don't think Edmund would have had a chance if he had fought Trumpkin
twenty-four hours earlier.  But the air of Narnia had been working upon
him ever since they arrived on the island, and all his old battles came
back to him, and his arms and fingers remembered their old skill.  He
was King Edmund once more.  Round and round the two combatants circled,
stroke after stroke they gave, and Susan (who never could learn to like
this sort of thing) shouted out, "Oh, _do_ be careful."  And then, so
quickly that no one (unless they knew, as Peter did) could quite see
how it happened, Edmund flashed his sword round with a peculiar twist,
the Dwarf's sword flew out of his grip, and Trumpkin was wringing his
empty hand as you do after a "sting" from a cricket-bat.

"Not hurt, I hope, my dear little friend?" said Edmund, panting a
little and returning his own sword to its sheath.

"I see the point," said Trumpkin drily.  "You know a trick I never
learned."

"That's quite true," put in Peter.  "The best swordsman in the world
may be disarmed by a trick that's new to him.  I think it's only fair
to give Trumpkin a chance at something else.  Will you have a shooting
match with my sister?  There are no tricks in archery, you know."

"Ah, you're jokers, you are," said the Dwarf.  "I begin to see.  As if
I didn't know how she can shoot, after what happened this morning.  All
the same, I'll have a try."  He spoke gruffly, but his eyes brightened,
for he was a famous bowman among his own people.

All five of them came out into the courtyard.

"What's to be the target?" asked Peter.

"I think that apple hanging over the wall on the branch there would
do," said Susan.

"That'll do nicely, lass," said Trumpkin.  "You mean the yellow one
near the middle of the arch?"

"No, not that," said Susan.  "The red one up above--over the
battlement."

The Dwarf's face fell.  "Looks more like a cherry than an apple," he
muttered, but he said nothing out loud.

They tossed up for first shot (greatly to the interest of Trumpkin, who
had never seen a coin tossed before) and Susan lost.  They were to
shoot from the top of the steps that led from the hall into the
courtyard.  Everyone could see from the way the Dwarf took his position
and handled the bow that he knew what he was about.

Twang went the string.  It was an excellent shot.  The tiny apple shook
as the arrow passed, and a leaf came fluttering down.  Then Susan went
to the top of the steps and strung her bow.  She was not enjoying her
match half so much as Edmund had enjoyed his; not because she had any
doubt about hitting the apple but because Susan was so tender-hearted
that she almost hated to beat someone who had been beaten already.  The
Dwarf watched her keenly as she drew the shaft to her ear.  A moment
later, with a little soft thump which they could all hear in that quiet
place, the apple fell to the grass with Susan's arrow in it.

"Oh, well done, Su," shouted the other children.

"It wasn't really any better than yours," said Susan to the Dwarf.  "I
think there was a tiny breath of wind as you shot."

"No there wasn't," said Trumpkin.  "Don't tell me.  I know when I am
fairly beaten.  I won't even say that the scar of my last wound catches
me a bit when I get my arm well back----"

"Oh, are you wounded?" asked Lucy.  "Do let me look."

"It's not a sight for little girls," began Trumpkin, but then he
suddenly checked himself.  "There I go talking like a fool again," he
said.  "I suppose you're as likely to be a great surgeon as your
brother was to be a great swordsman or your sister to be a great
archer."  He sat down on the steps and took off his hauberk and slipped
down his little shirt, showing an arm hairy and muscular (in
proportion) as a sailor's though not much bigger than a child's.  There
was a clumsy bandage on the shoulder which Lucy proceeded to unroll.
Underneath, the cut looked very nasty and there was a good deal of
swelling.  "Oh, poor Trumpkin," said Lucy.  "How horrid."  Then she
carefully dripped on to it one single drop of the cordial from her
flask.

"Hullo.  Eh?  What have you done?" said Trumpkin.  But however he
turned his head and squinted and whisked his beard to and fro, he
couldn't quite see his own shoulder.  Then he felt it as well as he
could, getting his arms and fingers into very difficult positions as
you do when you're trying to scratch a place that is just out of reach.
Then he swung his arm and raised it and tried the muscles, and finally
jumped to his feet crying, "Giants and junipers!  It's cured!  It's as
good as new."  After that he burst into a great laugh and said, "Well,
I've made as big a fool of myself as ever a Dwarf did.  No offence, I
hope?  My humble duty to your Majesties all--humble duty.  And thanks
for my life, my cure, my breakfast--and my lesson."

The children all said it was quite all right and not to mention it.

"And now," said Peter, "if you've really decided to believe in us----"

"I have," said the Dwarf.

"It's quite clear what we have to do.  We must join King Caspian at
once."

"The sooner the better," said Trumpkin.  "My being such a fool has
already wasted about an hour."

"It's about two days' journey, the way you came," said Peter.  "For us,
I mean.  We can't walk all day and night like you Dwarfs."  Then he
turned to the others.  "What Trumpkin calls Aslan's How is obviously
the Stone Table itself.  You remember it was about half a day's march,
or a little less, from there down to the Fords of Beruna----"

"Beruna's Bridge, we call it," said Trumpkin.

"There was no bridge in our time," said Peter.  "And then from Beruna
down to here was another day and a bit.  We used to get home about
teatime on the second day, going easily.  Going hard, we could do the
whole thing in a day and a half perhaps."

"But remember it's all woods now," said Trumpkin, "and there are
enemies to dodge."

"Look here," said Edmund, "need we go by the same way that Our Dear
Little Friend came?"

"No more of that, your Majesty, if you love me," said the Dwarf.

"Very well," said Edmund.  "May I say our D.L.F.?"

"Oh, Edmund," said Susan.  "Don't keep _on_ at him like that."

"That's all right, lass--I mean your Majesty," said Trumpkin with a
chuckle.  "A jibe won't raise a blister."  (And after that they often
called him the D.L.F. till they'd almost forgotten what it meant.)

"As I was saying," continued Edmund, "we needn't go that way.  Why
shouldn't we row a little south till we come to Glasswater Creek and
row up it?  That brings us up behind the Hill of the Stone Table, and
we'll be safe while we're at sea.  If we start at once, we can be at
the head of Glasswater before dark, get a few hours' sleep, and be with
Caspian pretty early to-morrow."

"What a thing it is to know the coast," said Trumpkin.  "None of us
know anything about Glasswater."

"What about food?" asked Susan.

"Oh, we'll have to do with apples," said Lucy.  "Do let's get on.
We've done nothing yet, and we've been here nearly two days."

"And anyway, no one's going to have my hat for a fish-basket again,"
said Edmund.

They used one of the raincoats as a kind of bag and put a good many
apples in it.  Then they all had a good long drink at the well (for
they would meet no more fresh water till they landed at the head of the
Creek) and went down to the boat.  The children were sorry to leave
Cair Paravel, which, even in ruins, had begun to feel like home again.

"The D.L.F. had better steer," said Peter, "and Ed and I will take an
oar each.  Half a moment, though.  We'd better take off our mail: we're
going to be pretty warm before we're done.  The girls had better be in
the bows and shout directions to the D.L.F. because he doesn't know the
way.  You'd better get us a fair way out to sea till we've passed the
island."

And soon the green, wooded coast of the island was falling away behind
them, and its little bays and headlands were beginning to look flatter,
and the boat was rising and falling in the gentle swell.  The sea began
to grow bigger around them and, in the distance, bluer, but close round
the boat it was green and bubbly.  Everything smelled salt and there
was no noise except the swishing of water and the clop-clop of water
against the sides and the splash of the oars and the jolting noise of
the rowlocks.  The sun grew hot.

It was delightful for Lucy and Susan in the bows, bending over the edge
and trying to get their hands in the sea which they could never quite
reach.  The bottom, mostly pure, pale sand but with occasional patches
of purple seaweed, could be seen beneath them.

"It's like old times," said Lucy.  "Do you remember our voyage to
Terebinthia--and Galma--and Seven Isles--and the Lone Islands?"

"Yes," said Susan, "and our great ship the _Splendour Hyaline_, with
the swan's head at her prow and the carved swan's wings coming back
almost to her waist?"

"And the silken sails, and the great stern lanterns?"

"And the feasts on the poop and the musicians."

"Do you remember when we had the musicians up in the rigging playing
flutes so that it sounded like music out of the sky?"

Presently Susan took over Edmund's oar and he came forward to join
Lucy.  They had passed the island now and stood closer in to the
shore--all wooded and deserted.  They would have thought it very pretty
if they had not remembered the time when it was open and breezy and
full of merry friends.

"Phew!  This is pretty gruelling work," said Peter.

"Can't I row for a bit?" said Lucy.

"The oars are too big for you," said Peter shortly, not because he was
cross but because he had no strength to spare for talking.




_Chapter IX_

WHAT LUCY SAW

Susan and the two boys were bitterly tired with rowing before they
rounded the last headland and began the final pull up Glasswater
itself, and Lucy's head ached from the long hours of sun and the glare
on the water.  Even Trumpkin longed for the voyage to be over.  The
seat on which he sat to steer had been made for men, not Dwarfs, and
his feet did not reach the floor-boards; and everyone knows how
uncomfortable that is even for ten minutes.  And as they all grew more
tired, their spirits fell.  Up till now the children had only been
thinking of how to get to Caspian.  Now they wondered what they would
do when they found him, and how a handful of Dwarfs and woodland
creatures could defeat an army of grown-up Humans.

Twilight was coming on as they rowed slowly up the windings of
Glasswater Creek--a twilight which deepened as the banks drew closer
together and the overhanging trees began almost to meet overhead.  It
was very quiet in here as the sound of the sea died away behind them;
they could even hear the trickle of the little streams that poured down
from the forest into Glasswater.

They went ashore at last, far too tired to attempt lighting a fire; and
even a supper of apples (though most of them felt that they never
wanted to see an apple again) seemed better than trying to catch or
shoot anything.  After a little silent munching they all huddled down
together in the moss and dead leaves between four large beech trees.

Everyone except Lucy went to sleep at once.  Lucy, being far less
tired, found it hard to get comfortable.  Also, she had forgotten till
now that all Dwarfs snore.  She knew that one of the best ways of
getting to sleep is to stop trying, so she opened her eyes.  Through a
gap in the bracken and branches she could just see a patch of water in
the Creek and the sky above it.  Then, with a thrill of memory, she saw
again, after all those years, the bright Narnian stars.  She had once
known them better than the stars of our own world, because as a Queen
in Narnia she had gone to bed much later than as a child in England.
And there they were--at least, three of the summer constellations could
be seen from where she lay: the Ship, the Hammer, and the Leopard.
"Dear old Leopard," she murmured happily to herself.

Instead of getting drowsier she was getting more awake--with an odd,
night-time, dreamish kind of wakefulness.  The Creek was growing
brighter.  She knew now that the moon was on it, though she couldn't
see the moon.  And now she began to feel that the whole forest was
coming awake like herself.  Hardly knowing why she did it, she got up
quickly and walked a little distance away from their bivouac.

"This is lovely," said Lucy to herself.  It was cool and fresh;
delicious smells were floating everywhere.  Somewhere close by she
heard the twitter of a nightingale beginning to sing, then stopping,
then beginning again.  It was a little lighter ahead.  She went towards
the light and came to a place where there were fewer trees, and whole
patches or pools of moonlight, but the moonlight and the shadows so
mixed that you could hardly be sure where anything was or what it was.
At the same moment the nightingale, satisfied at last with his tuning
up, burst into full song.

Lucy's eyes began to grow accustomed to the light, and she saw the
trees that were nearest her more distinctly.  A great longing for the
old days when the trees could talk in Narnia came over her.  She knew
exactly how each of these trees would talk if only she could wake them,
and what sort of human form it would put on.  She looked at a silver
birch: it would have a soft, showery voice and would look like a
slender girl, with hair blown all about her face, and fond of dancing.
She looked at the oak: he would be a wizened, but hearty old man with a
frizzled beard and warts on his face and hands, and hair growing out of
the warts.  She looked at the beech under which she was standing.
Ah!--she would be the best of all.  She would be a gracious goddess,
smooth and stately, the lady of the wood.

"Oh, Trees, Trees, Trees," said Lucy (though she had not been intending
to speak at all).  "Oh, Trees, wake, wake, wake.  Don't you remember
it?  Don't you remember _me_?  Dryads and Hamadryads, come out, come to
me."

Though there was not a breath of wind they all stirred about her.  The
rustling noise of the leaves was almost like words.  The nightingale
stopped singing as if to listen to it.  Lucy felt that at any moment
she would begin to understand what the trees were trying to say.  But
the moment did not come.  The rustling died away.  The nightingale
resumed its song.  Even in the moonlight the wood looked more ordinary
again.  Yet Lucy had the feeling (as you sometimes have when you are
trying to remember a name or a date and almost get it, but it vanishes
before you really do) that she had just missed something: as if she had
spoken to the trees a split second too soon or a split second too late,
or used all the right words except one, or put in one word that was
just wrong.

Quite suddenly she began to feel tired.  She went back to the bivouac,
snuggled down between Susan and Peter, and was asleep in a few minutes.

It was a cold and cheerless waking for them all next morning, with a
grey twilight in the wood (for the sun had not yet risen) and
everything damp and dirty.

"Apples, heigh-ho," said Trumpkin with a rueful grin.  "I must say you
ancient kings and queens don't overfeed your courtiers!"

They stood up and shook themselves and looked about.  The trees were
thick and they could see no more than a few yards in any direction.

"I suppose your Majesties know the way all right?" said the Dwarf.

"I don't," said Susan.  "I've never seen these woods in my life before.
In fact I thought all along that we ought to have gone by the river."

"Then I think you might have said so at the time," answered Peter, with
pardonable sharpness.

"Oh, don't take any notice of her," said Edmund.  "She always is a wet
blanket.  You've got that pocket compass of yours, Peter, haven't you?
Well, then, we're as right as rain.  We've only got to keep on going
north-west--cross that little river, the what-do-you-call-it?--the
Rush----"

"I know," said Peter.  "The one that joins the big river at the Fords
of Beruna, or Beruna's Bridge, as the D.L.F. calls it."

"That's right.  Cross it and strike uphill, and we'll be at the Stone
Table (Aslan's How, I mean) by eight or nine o'clock.  I hope King
Caspian will give us a good breakfast!"

"I hope you're right," said Susan.  "I can't remember all that at all."

"That's the worst of girls," said Edmund to Peter and the Dwarf.  "They
never can carry a map in their heads."

"That's because our heads have something inside them," said Lucy.


At first things seemed to be going pretty well.  They even thought they
had struck an old path; but if you know anything about woods, you will
know that one is always finding imaginary paths.  They disappear after
about five minutes and then you think you have found another (and hope
it is not another but more of the same one) and it also disappears, and
after you have been well lured out of your right direction you realise
that none of them were paths at all.  The boys and the Dwarf, however,
were used to woods and were not taken in for more than a few seconds.

They had plodded on for about half an hour (three of.  them very stiff
from yesterday's rowing) when Trumpkin suddenly whispered, "Stop."
They all stopped.  "There's something following us," he said in a low
voice.  "Or rather, something keeping up with us: over there on the
left."  They all stood still, listening and staring till their ears and
eyes ached.  "You and I'd better each have an arrow on the string,"
said Susan to Trumpkin.  The Dwarf nodded, and when both bows were
ready for action the party went on again.

They went a few dozen yards through fairly open woodland, keeping a
sharp look-out.  Then they came to a place where the undergrowth
thickened and they had to pass nearer to it.  Just as they were passing
the place, there came a sudden something that snarled and flashed,
rising out from the breaking twigs like a thunderbolt.  Lucy was
knocked down and winded, hearing the twang of a bowstring as she fell.
When she was able to take notice of things again, she saw a great
grim-looking grey bear lying dead with Trumpkin's arrow in its side.

"The D.L.F. beat you in _that_ shooting match, Su," said Peter, with a
slightly forced smile.  Even he had been shaken by this adventure.

"I--I left it too late," said Susan, in an embarrassed voice.  "I was
so afraid it might be, you know--one of our kind of bears, a _talking_
bear."  She hated killing things.

"That's the trouble of it," said Trumpkin, "when most of the beasts
have gone enemy and gone dumb, but there are still some of the other
kind left.  You never know, and you daren't wait to see."

"Poor old Bruin," said Susan.  "You don't think he was?"

"Not he," said the Dwarf.  "I saw the face and I heard the snarl.  He
only wanted Little Girl for his breakfast.  And talking of breakfast, I
didn't want to discourage your Majesties when you said you hoped King
Caspian would give you a good one: but meat's precious scarce in camp.
And there's good eating on a bear.  It would be a shame to leave the
carcass without taking a bit, and it won't delay us more than half an
hour.  I dare say you two youngsters--Kings, I should say--know how to
skin a bear?"

"Let's go and sit down a fair way off," said Susan to Lucy.  "I know
what a horrid messy business _that_ will be."  Lucy shuddered and
nodded.  When they had sat down she said: "Such a horrible idea has
come into my head, Su."

"What's that?"

"Wouldn't it be dreadful if some day, in our own world, at home, men
started going wild inside, like the animals here, and still looked like
men, so that you'd never know which were which?"

"We've got enough to bother about here and now in Narnia," said the
practical Susan, "without imagining things like that."

When they rejoined the boys and the Dwarf, as much as they thought they
could carry of the best meat had been cut off.  Raw meat is not a nice
thing to fill one's pockets with, but they folded it up in fresh leaves
and made the best of it.  They were all experienced enough to know that
they would feel quite differently about these squashy and unpleasant
parcels when they had walked long enough to be really hungry.

On they trudged again (stopping to wash three pairs of hands that
needed it in the first stream they passed) until the sun rose and the
birds began to sing, and more flies than they wanted were buzzing in
the bracken.  The stiffness from yesterday's rowing began to wear off.

Everybody's spirits rose.  The sun grew warmer and they took their
helmets off and carried them.

"I suppose we are going right?" said Edmund about an hour later.

"I don't see how we can go wrong as long as we don't bear too much to
the left," said Peter.  "If we bear too much to the right, the worst
that can happen is wasting a little time by striking the Great River
too soon and not cutting off the corner."

And again they trudged on with no sound except the thud of their feet
and the jingle of their chain shirts.

"Where's this bally Rush got to?" said Edmund a good deal later.

"I certainly thought we'd have struck it by now," said Peter.  "But
there's nothing to do but keep on."  They both knew that the Dwarf was
looking anxiously at them, but he said nothing.

And still they trudged on and their mail shirts began to feel very hot
and heavy.

"What on earth?" said Peter suddenly.

They had come, without seeing it, almost to the edge of a small
precipice from which they looked down into a gorge with a river at the
bottom.  On the far side the cliffs rose much higher.  None of the
party except Edmund (and perhaps Trumpkin) was a rock climber.

"I'm sorry," said Peter.  "It's my fault for coming this way.  We're
lost.  I've never seen this place in my life before."

The Dwarf gave a low whistle between his teeth.

"Oh, do let's go back and go the other way," said Susan.  "I knew all
along we'd get lost in these woods."

"Susan!" said Lucy, reproachfully, "don't nag at Peter like that.  It's
so rotten, and he's doing all he can."

"And don't you snap at Su like that, either," said Edmund.  "I think
she's quite right."

"Tubs and tortoiseshells!" exclaimed Trumpkin.  "If we've got lost
coming, what chance have we of finding our way back?  And if we're to
go back to the Island and begin all over again--even supposing we
could--we might as well give the whole thing up.  Miraz will have
finished with Caspian before we get there at that rate."

"You think we ought to go on?" said Lucy.

"I'm not sure the High King _is_ lost," said Trumpkin.  "What's to
hinder this river being the Rush?"

"Because the Rush is not in a gorge," said Peter, keeping his temper
with some difficulty.

"Your Majesty says _is_," replied the Dwarf, "but oughtn't you to say
_was_?  You knew this country hundreds--it may be a thousand--years
ago.  Mayn't it have changed?  A landslide might have pulled off half
the side of that hill, leaving bare rock, and there are your precipices
beyond the gorge.  Then the Rush might go on deepening its course year
after year till you get the little precipices this side.  Or there
might have been an earthquake, or anything."

"I never thought of that," said Peter.

"And anyway," continued Trumpkin, "even if this is not the Rush, it's
flowing roughly north and so it must fall into the Great River anyway.
I think I passed something that might have been it, on my way down.  So
if we go down-stream, to our right, we'll hit the Great River.  Perhaps
not so high as we'd hoped, but at least we'll be no worse off than if
you'd come my way."

"Trumpkin, you're a brick," said Peter.  "Come on, then.  Down this
side of the gorge."

"Look!  Look!  Look!" cried Lucy.

"Where?  What?" asked everyone.

"The Lion," said Lucy.  "Aslan himself.  Didn't you see?"  Her face had
changed completely and her eyes shone.

"Do you really mean----" began Peter.

"Where did you think you saw him?" asked Susan.

"Don't talk like a grown-up," said Lucy, stamping her foot.  "I didn't
_think_ I saw him.  I saw him."

"Where, Lu?" asked Peter.

"Right up there between those mountain ashes.  No, this side of the
gorge.  And up, not down.  Just the opposite of the way you want to go.
And he wanted us to go where he was--up there."

"How do you know that was what he wanted?" asked Edmund.

"He--I--I just know," said Lucy, "by his face."

The others all looked at each other in puzzled silence.

"Her Majesty may well have seen a lion," put in Trumpkin.  "There are
lions in these woods, I've been told.  But it needn't have been a
friendly and talking lion any more than the bear was a friendly and
talking bear."

"Oh, don't be so stupid," said Lucy.  "Do you think I don't know Aslan
when I see him?"

"He'd be a pretty elderly lion by now," said Trumpkin, "if he's one you
knew when you were here before!  And if it could be the same one,
what's to prevent him having gone wild and witless like so many others?"

Lucy turned crimson and I think she would have flown at Trumpkin, if
Peter had not laid his hand on her arm.  "The D.L.F. doesn't
understand.  How could he?  You must just take it, Trumpkin, that we do
really know about Aslan; a little bit about him, I mean.  And you
mustn't talk about him like that again.  It isn't lucky for one thing:
and it's all nonsense for another.  The only question is whether Aslan
was really there."

"But I know he was," said Lucy, her eyes filling with tears.

"Yes, Lu, but we don't, you see," said Peter.

"There's nothing for it but a vote," said Edmund.

"All right," replied Peter.  "You're the eldest, D.L.F.  What do you
vote for?  Up or down?"

"Down," said the Dwarf.  "I know nothing about Aslan.  But I do know
that if we turn left and follow the gorge up, it might lead us all day
before we found a place where we could cross it.  Whereas if we turn
right and go down, we're bound to reach the Great River in about a
couple of hours.  And if there are any real lions about, we want to go
away from them, not towards them."

"What do you say, Susan?"

"Don't be angry, Lu," said Susan, "but I do think we should go down.
I'm dead tired.  Do let's get out of this wretched wood into the open
as quick as we can.  And none of us except you saw _anything_."

"Edmund?" said Peter.

"Well, there's just this," said Edmund, speaking quickly and turning a
little red.  "When we first discovered Narnia a year ago--or a thousand
years ago, whichever it is--it was Lucy who discovered it first and
none of us would believe her.  I was the worst of the lot, I know.  Yet
she was right after all.  Wouldn't it be fair to believe her this time?
I vote for going up."

"Oh, Ed!" said Lucy and seized his hand.

"And now it's your turn, Peter," said Susan, "and I do hope----"

"Oh, shut up, shut up and let a chap think," interrupted Peter.  "I'd
much rather not have to vote."

"You're the High King," said Trumpkin sternly.

"Down," said Peter after a long pause.  "I know Lucy may be right after
all, but I can't help it.  We must do one or the other."

So they set off to their right along the edge, downstream.  And Lucy
came last of the party, crying bitterly.




_Chapter X_

THE RETURN OF THE LION

To keep along the edge of the gorge was not so easy as it had looked.
Before they had gone many yards they were confronted with young fir
woods growing on the very edge, and after they had tried to go through
these, stooping and pushing for about ten minutes, they realised that,
in there, it would take them an hour to do half a mile.  So they came
back and out again and decided to go round the fir wood.  This took
them much farther to their right than they wanted to go, far out of
sight of the cliffs and out of sound of the river, till they began to
be afraid they had lost it altogether.  Nobody knew the time, but it
was getting to the hottest part of the day.

When they were able at last to go back to the edge of the gorge (nearly
a mile below the point from which they had started) they found the
cliffs on their side of it a good deal lower and more broken.  Soon
they found a way down into the gorge and continued the journey at the
river's edge.  But first they had a rest and a long drink.  No one was
talking any more about breakfast, or even dinner, with Caspian.

They may have been wise to stick to the Rush instead of going along the
top.  It kept them sure of their direction: and ever since the fir wood
they had all been afraid of being forced too far out of their course
and losing themselves in the wood.  It was an old and pathless forest,
and you could not keep anything like a straight course in it.  Patches
of hopeless brambles, fallen trees, boggy places and dense undergrowth
would be always getting in your way.  But the gorge of the Rush was not
at all a nice place for travelling either.  I mean, it was not a nice
place for people in a hurry.  For an afternoon's ramble ending in a
picnic tea it would have been delightful.  It had everything you could
want on an occasion of that sort--rumbling waterfalls, silver cascades,
deep, amber-coloured pools, mossy rocks, and deep moss on the banks in
which you could sink over your ankles, every kind of fern, jewel-like
dragon flies, sometimes a hawk overhead and once (Peter and Trumpkin
both thought) an eagle.  But of course what the children and the Dwarf
wanted to see as soon as possible was the Great River below them, and
Beruna, and the way to Aslan's How.

As they went on, the Rush began to fall more and more steeply.  Their
journey became more and more of a climb and less and less of a walk--in
places even a dangerous climb over slippery rock with a nasty drop into
dark chasms, and the river roaring angrily at the bottom.

You may be sure they watched the cliffs on their left eagerly for any
sign of a break or any place where they could climb them; but those
cliffs remained cruel.  It was maddening, because everyone knew that if
once they were out of the gorge on that side, they would have only a
smooth slope and a fairly short walk to Caspian's headquarters.

The boys and the Dwarf were now in favour of lighting a fire and
cooking their bear-meat.  Susan didn't want this; she only wanted, as
she said, "to get on and finish it and get out of these beastly woods".
Lucy was far too tired and miserable to have any opinion about
anything.  But as there was no dry wood to be had, it mattered very
little what anyone thought.  The boys began to wonder if raw meat was
really as nasty as they had always been told.  Trumpkin assured them it
was.

Of course, if the children had attempted a journey like this a few days
ago in England, they would have been knocked up.  I think I have
explained before how Narnia was altering them.  Even Lucy was by now,
so to speak, only one-third of a little girl going to boarding school
for the first time, and two-thirds of Queen Lucy of Narnia.

"At last!" said Susan.

"Oh, hurray!" said Peter.

The river gorge had just made a bend and the whole view spread out
beneath them.  They could see open country stretching before them to
the horizon and, between it and them, the broad silver ribbon of the
Great River.  They could see the specially broad and shallow place
which had once been the Fords of Beruna but was now spanned by a long,
many-arched bridge.  There was a little town at the far end of it.

"By Jove," said Edmund.  "We fought the Battle of Beruna just where
that town is!"

This cheered the boys more than anything.  You can't help feeling
stronger when you look at a place where you won a glorious victory, not
to mention a kingdom, hundreds of years ago.  Peter and Edmund were
soon so busy talking about the battle that they forgot their sore feet
and the heavy drag of their mail shirts on their shoulders.  The Dwarf
was interested too.

They were all getting on at a quicker pace now.  The going became
easier.  Though there were still sheer cliffs on their left, the ground
was becoming lower on their right.  Soon it was no longer a gorge at
all, only a valley.  There were no more waterfalls and presently they
were in fairly thick woods again.

Then--all at once--_whizz_, and a sound rather like the stroke of a
woodpecker.  The children were still wondering where (ages ago) they
had heard a sound just like that and why they disliked it so, when
Trumpkin shouted, "Down," at the same moment forcing Lucy (who happened
to be next to him) flat down into the bracken.  Peter, who had been
looking up to see if he could spot a squirrel, had seen what it was--a
long cruel arrow had sunk into a tree trunk just above his head.  As he
pulled Susan down and dropped himself, another came rasping over his
shoulder and struck the ground at his side.

"Quick!  Quick!  Get back!  _Crawl_!" panted Trumpkin.

They turned and wriggled along uphill, under the bracken, amid clouds
of horribly buzzing flies.  Arrows whizzed round them.  One struck
Susan's helmet with a sharp ping and glanced off.  They crawled
quicker.  Sweat poured off them.  Then they ran, stooping nearly
double.  The boys held their swords in their hands for fear they would
trip them up.

It was heart-breaking work--all uphill again, back over the ground they
had already travelled.  When they felt that they really couldn't run
any more, even to save their lives, they all dropped down in the damp
moss beside a waterfall and behind a big boulder, panting.  They were
surprised to see how high they had already got.

They listened intently and heard no sound of pursuit.

"So _that's_ all right," said Trumpkin, drawing a deep breath.
"They're not searching the wood.  Only sentries, I expect.  But it
means that Miraz has an outpost down there.  Bottles and battledores!
though, it was a near thing."

"I ought to have my head smacked for bringing us this way at all," said
Peter.

"On the contrary, your Majesty," said the Dwarf.  "For one thing it
wasn't you, it was your royal brother, King Edmund, who first suggested
going by Glasswater."

"I'm afraid the D.L.F.'s right," said Edmund, who had quite honestly
forgotten this ever since things began going wrong.

"And for another," continued Trumpkin, "if we'd gone my way, we'd have
walked straight into that new outpost, most likely; or at least had
just the same trouble avoiding it.  I think this Glasswater route has
turned out for the best."

"A blessing in disguise," said Susan.

"Some disguise!" said Edmund.

"I suppose we'll have to go right up the gorge again now," said Lucy.

"Lu, you're a hero," said Peter.  "That's the nearest you've got to-day
to saying _I told you so_.  Let's get on."

"And as soon as we're well up into the forest," said Trumpkin,
"whatever anyone says, I'm going to light a fire and cook supper.  But
we must get well away from here."

There is no need to describe how they toiled back up the gorge.  It was
pretty hard work, but oddly enough everyone felt more cheerful.  They
were getting their second wind; and the word supper had had a wonderful
effect.

They reached the fir wood which had caused them so much trouble while
it was still daylight, and bivouacked in a hollow just above it.  It
was tedious gathering the fire wood; but it was grand when the fire
blazed up and they began producing the damp and smeary parcels of
bear-meat which would have been so very unattractive to anyone who had
spent the day indoors.  The Dwarf had splendid ideas about cookery.
Each apple (they still had a few of these) was wrapped up in bear's
meat--as if it was to be apple dumpling with meat instead of pastry,
only much thicker--and spiked on a sharp stick and then roasted.  And
the juice of the apple worked all through the meat, like apple sauce
with roast pork.  Bear that has lived too much on other animals is not
very nice, but bear that has had plenty of honey and fruit is
excellent, and this turned out to be that sort of bear.  It was a truly
glorious meal.  And, of course, no washing up--only lying back and
watching the smoke from Trumpkin's pipe and stretching one's tired legs
and chatting.  Everyone felt quite hopeful now about finding King
Caspian to-morrow and defeating Miraz in a few days.  It may not have
been sensible of them to feel like this, but they did.

They dropped off to sleep one by one, but all pretty quickly.

Lucy woke out of the deepest sleep you can imagine, with the feeling
that the voice she liked best in the world had been calling her name.
She thought at first it was her father's voice, but that did not seem
quite right.  Then she thought it was Peter's voice, but that did not
seem to fit either.  She did not want to get up; not because she was
still tired--on the contrary she was wonderfully rested and all the
aches had gone from her bones--but because she felt so extremely happy
and comfortable.  She was looking straight up at the Narnian moon,
which is larger than ours, and at the starry sky, for the place where
they had bivouacked was comparatively open.

"Lucy," came the call again, neither her father's voice nor Peter's.
She sat up, trembling with excitement but not with fear.  The moon was
so bright that the whole forest landscape around her was almost as
clear as day, though it looked wilder.  Behind her was the fir wood;
away to her right the jagged cliff-tops on the far side of the gorge;
straight ahead, open grass to where a glade of trees began about a
bow-shot away.  Lucy looked very hard at the trees of that glade.

"Why, I do believe they're moving," she said to her self.  "They're
walking about."

She got up, her heart beating wildly, and walked towards them.  There
was certainly a noise in the glade, a noise such as trees make in a
high wind, though there was no wind to-night.  Yet it was not exactly
an ordinary tree-noise either.  Lucy felt there was a tune in it, but
she could not catch the tune any more than she had been able to catch
the words when the trees had so nearly talked to her the night before.
But there was, at least, a lilt; she felt her own feet wanting to dance
as she got nearer.  And now there was no doubt that the trees were
really moving--moving in and out through one another as if in a
complicated country dance.  ("And I suppose," thought Lucy, "when trees
dance, it must be a very, very country dance indeed.")  She was almost
among them now.

The first tree she looked at seemed at first glance to be not a tree at
all but a huge man with a shaggy beard and great bushes of hair.  She
was not frightened: she had seen such things before.  But when she
looked again he was only a tree, though he was still moving.  You
couldn't see whether he had feet or roots, of course, because when
trees move they don't walk on the surface of the earth; they wade in it
as we do in water.  The same thing happened with every tree she looked
at.  At one moment they seemed to be the friendly, lovely giant and
giantess forms which the tree-people put on when some good magic has
called them into full life: next moment they all looked like trees
again.  But when they looked like trees, it was like strangely human
trees, and when they looked like people, it was like strangely branchy
and leafy people--and all the time that queer lilting, rustling, cool,
merry noise.

"They are almost awake, not quite," said Lucy.  She knew she herself
was wide awake, wider than anyone usually is.

She went fearlessly in among them, dancing herself at, she leaped this
way and that to avoid being run into by these huge partners.  But she
was only half interested in them.  She wanted to get beyond them to
something else; it was from beyond them that the dear voice had called.

She soon got through them (half wondering whether she had been using
her arms to push branches aside, or to take hands in a Great Chain with
big dancers who stooped to reach her) for they were really a ring of
trees round a central open place.  She stepped out from among their
shifting confusion of lovely lights and shadows.

A circle of grass, smooth as a lawn, met her eyes, with dark trees
dancing all round it.  And then--oh joy!  For he was there: the huge
Lion, shining white in the moonlight, with his huge black shadow
underneath him.

But for the movement of his tail he might have been a stone lion, but
Lucy never thought of that.  She never stopped to think whether he was
a friendly lion or not.  She rushed to him.  She felt her heart would
burst if she lost a moment.  And the next thing she knew was that she
was kissing him and putting her arms as far round his neck as she could
and burying her face in the beautiful rich silkiness of his mane.

"Aslan, Aslan.  Dear Aslan," sobbed Lucy.  "At last."

The great beast rolled over on his side so that Lucy fell, half sitting
and half lying between his front paws.  He bent forward and just
touched her nose with his tongue.  His warm breath came all round her.
She gazed up into the large wise face.

"Welcome, child," he said.

"Aslan," said Lucy, "you're bigger."

"That is because you are older, little one," answered he.

"Not because you are?"

"I am not.  But every year you grow, you will find me bigger."

For a time she was so happy that she did not want to speak.  But Aslan
spoke.

"Lucy," he said, "we must not lie here for long.  You have work in
hand, and much time has been lost to-day."

"Yes, wasn't it a shame?" said Lucy.  "_I_ saw you all right.  They
wouldn't believe me.  They're all so----"

From somewhere deep inside Aslan's body there came the faintest
suggestion of a growl.

"I'm sorry," said Lucy, who understood some of his moods.  "I didn't
mean to start slanging the others.  But it wasn't my fault anyway, was
it?"

The Lion looked straight into her eyes.

"Oh, Aslan," said Lucy.  "You don't mean it was?  How could I--I
couldn't have left the others and come up to you alone, how could I?
Don't look at me like that ... oh well, I suppose I _could_.  Yes, and
it wouldn't have been alone, I know, not if I was with you.  But what
would have been the good?"

Aslan said nothing.

"You mean," said Lucy rather faintly, "that it would have turned out
all right--somehow?  But how?  Please, Aslan!  Am I not to know?"

"To know what _would_ have happened, child?" said Aslan.  "No.  Nobody
is ever told that."

"Oh dear," said Lucy.

"But anyone can find out what _will_ happen," said Aslan.  "If you go
back to the others now, and wake them up; and tell them you have seen
me again; and that you must all get up at once and follow me--what will
happen?  There is only one way of finding out."

"Do you mean that is what you want me to do?" gasped Lucy.

"Yes, little one," said Aslan.

"Will the others see you too?" asked Lucy.

"Certainly not at first," said Aslan.  "Later on, it depends."

"But they won't believe me!" said Lucy.

"It doesn't matter," said Aslan.

"Oh dear, oh dear," said Lucy.  "And I was so pleased at finding you
again.  And I thought you'd let me stay.  And I thought you'd come
roaring in and frighten all the enemies away--like last time.  And now
everything is going to be horrid."

"It is hard for you, little one," said Aslan.  "But things never happen
the same way twice.  It has been hard for us all in Narnia before now."

Lucy buried her head in his mane to hide from his face.  But there must
have been magic in his mane.  She could feel lion-strength going into
her.  Quite suddenly she sat up.

"I'm sorry, Aslan," she said.  "I'm ready now."

"Now you are a lioness," said Aslan.  "And now all Narnia will be
renewed.  But come.  We have no time to lose."

He got up and walked with stately, noiseless paces back to the belt of
dancing trees through which she had just come: and Lucy went with him,
laying a rather tremulous hand on his mane.  The trees parted to let
them through and for one second assumed their human forms completely.
Lucy had a glimpse of tall and lovely wood-gods and wood-goddesses all
bowing to the Lion; next moment they were trees again, but still
bowing, with such graceful sweeps of branch and trunk that their bowing
was itself a kind of dance.

"Now, child," said Aslan, when they had left the trees behind them, "I
will wait here.  Go and wake the others and tell them to follow.  If
they will not, then you at least must follow me alone."

It is a terrible thing to have to wake four people, all older than
yourself and all very tired, for the purpose of telling them something
they probably won't believe and making them do something they certainly
won't like.  "I mustn't think about it, I must just do it," thought
Lucy.

She went to Peter first and shook him.  "Peter," she whispered in his
ear, "wake up.  Quick.  Aslan is here.  He says we've got to follow him
at once."

"Certainly, Lu.  Whatever you like," said Peter unexpectedly.  This was
encouraging, but as Peter instantly rolled round and went to sleep
again it wasn't much use.

Then she tried Susan.  Susan did really wake up, but only to say in her
most annoying grown-up voice, "You've been dreaming, Lucy.  Go to sleep
again."

She tackled Edmund next.  It was very difficult to wake him, but when
at last she had done it he was really awake and sat up.

"Eh?" he said in a grumpy voice.  "What are you talking about?"

She said it all over again.  This was one of the worst parts of her
job, for each time she said it, it sounded less convincing.

"Aslan!" said Edmund, jumping up.  "Hurray!  Where?"

Lucy turned back to where she could see the Lion waiting, his patient
eyes fixed upon her.  "There," she said, pointing.

"Where?" asked Edmund again.

"There.  There.  Don't you see?  Just this side of the trees."

Edmund stared hard for a while and then said, "No.  There's nothing
there.  You've got dazzled and muddled with the moonlight.  One does,
you know.  I thought I saw something for a moment myself.  It's only an
optical what-do-you-call-it."

"I can see him all the time," said Lucy.  "He's looking straight at us."

"Then why can't I see him?"

"He said you mightn't be able to."

"Why?"

"I don't know.  That's what he said."

"Oh, bother it all," said Edmund.  "I do wish you wouldn't keep on
seeing things.  But I suppose we'll have to wake the others."




_Chapter XI_

THE LION ROARS

When the whole party was finally awake Lucy had to tell her story for
the fourth time.  The blank silence which followed it was as
discouraging as anything could be.

"I can't see anything," said Peter after he had stared his eyes sore.
"Can you, Susan?"

"No, of course I can't," snapped Susan.  "Because there isn't anything
to see.  She's been dreaming.  Do lie down and go to sleep, Lucy."

"And I do hope," said Lucy in a tremulous voice, "that you will all
come with me.  Because--because I'll have to go with him whether anyone
else does or not."

"Don't talk nonsense, Lucy," said Susan.  "Of course you can't go off
on your own.  Don't let her, Peter.  She's being downright naughty."

"I'll go with her, if she _must_ go," said Edmund.  "She's been right
before."

"I know she has," said Peter.  "And she may have been right this
morning.  We certainly had no luck going down the gorge.  Still--at
this hour of the night.  And why should Aslan be invisible to us?  He
never used to be.  It's not like him.  What does the D.L.F. say?"

"Oh, I say nothing at all," answered the Dwarf.  "If you all go, of
course, I'll go with you; and if your party splits up, I'll go with the
High King.  That's my duty to him and King Caspian.  But, if you ask my
private opinion, I'm a plain dwarf who doesn't think there's much
chance of finding a road by night where you couldn't find one by day.
And I have no use for magic lions which are talking lions and don't
talk, and friendly lions though they don't do us any good, and whopping
big lions though nobody can see them.  It's all bilge and beanstalks as
far as I can see."

"He's beating his paw on the ground for us to hurry," said Lucy.  "We
must go _now_.  At least I must."

"You've no right to try to force the rest of us like that.  It's four
to one and you're the youngest," said Susan.

"Oh, come on," growled Edmund.  "We've got to go.  There'll be no peace
till we do."  He fully intended to back Lucy up, but he was annoyed at
losing his night's sleep and was making up for it by doing everything
as sulkily as possible.

"On the march, then," said Peter, wearily fitting his arm into his
shield-strap and putting his helmet on.  At any other time he would
have said something nice to Lucy, who was his favourite sister, for he
knew how wretched she must be feeling, and he knew that, whatever had
happened, it was not her fault.  But he couldn't help being a little
annoyed with her all the same.

Susan was the worst.  "Supposing _I_ started behaving like Lucy," she
said.  "I might threaten to stay here whether the rest of you went on
or not.  I jolly well think I shall."

"Obey the High King, your Majesty," said Trumpkin, "and let's be off.
If I'm not to be allowed to sleep, I'd as soon march as stand here
talking."

And so at last they got on the move.  Lucy went first, biting her lip
and trying not to say all the things she thought of saying to Susan.
But she forgot them when she fixed her eyes on Aslan.  He turned and
walked at a slow pace about thirty yards ahead of them.  The others had
only Lucy's directions to guide them, for Aslan was not only invisible
to them but silent as well.  His big cat-like paws made no noise on the
grass.

He led them to the right of the dancing trees--whether they were still
dancing nobody knew, for Lucy had her eyes on the Lion and the rest had
their eyes on Lucy--and nearer the edge of the gorge.  "Cobbles and
kettle-drums!" thought Trumpkin.  "I hope this madness isn't going to
end in a moonlight climb and broken necks."

For a long way Aslan went along the top of the precipices.  Then they
came to a place where some little trees grew right on the edge.  He
turned and disappeared among them.  Lucy held her breath, for it looked
as if he had plunged over the cliff; but she was too busy keeping him
in sight to stop and think about this.  She quickened her pace and was
soon among the trees herself.  Looking down, she could see a steep and
narrow path going slant-wise down into the gorge between rocks, and
Aslan descending it.  He turned and looked at her with his happy eyes.
Lucy clapped her hands and began to scramble down after him.  From
behind her she heard the voices of the others shouting, "Hi!  Lucy!
Look out, for goodness' sake.  You're right on the edge of the gorge.
Come back----" and then, a moment later, Edmund's voice saying, "No,
she's right.  There is a way down."

Half-way down the path Edmund caught up with her.

"Look!" he said in great excitement.  "Look!  What's that shadow
crawling down in front of us?"

"It's _his_ shadow," said Lucy.

"I do believe you're right, Lu," said Edmund.  "I can't think how I
didn't see it before.  But where is he?"

"With his shadow, of course.  Can't you see him?"

"Well, I almost thought I did--for a moment.  It's such a rum light."

"Get on, King Edmund, get on," came Trumpkin's voice from behind and
above: and then, farther behind and still nearly at the top, Peter's
voice saying, "Oh, buck up, Susan.  Give me your hand.  Why, a baby
could get down here.  And do stop grousing."

In a few minutes they were at the bottom and the roaring of water
filled their ears.  Treading delicately, like a cat, Aslan stepped from
stone to stone across the stream.  In the middle he stopped, bent down
to drink, and as he raised his shaggy head, dripping from the water, he
turned to face them again.  This time Edmund saw him.  "Oh, Aslan!" he
cried, darting forward.  But the Lion whisked round and began padding
up the slope on the far side of the Rush.

"Peter, Peter," cried Edmund.  "Did you see?"

"I saw something," said Peter.  "But it's so tricky in this moonlight.
On we go, though, and three cheers for Lucy.  I don't feel half so
tired now, either."

Aslan without hesitation led them to their left, farther up the gorge.
The whole journey was odd and dream-like--the roaring stream, the wet
grey grass, the glimmering cliffs which they were approaching, and
always the glorious, silently pacing Beast ahead.  Everyone except
Susan and the Dwarf could see him now.

Presently they came to another steep path, up the face of the further
precipices.  These were far higher than the ones they had just
descended, and the journey up them was a long and tedious zig-zag.
Fortunately the Moon shone right above the gorge so that neither side
was in shadow.

Lucy was nearly blown when the tail and hind legs of Aslan disappeared
over the top: but with one last effort she scrambled after him and came
out, rather shaky-legged and breathless, on the hill they had been
trying to reach ever since they left Glasswater.  The long gentle slope
(heather and grass and a few very big rocks that shone white in the
moonlight) stretched up to where it vanished in a glimmer of trees
about half a mile away.  She knew it.  It was the hill of the Stone
Table.

With a jingling of mail the others climbed up behind her.  Aslan glided
on before them and they walked after him.

"Lucy," said Susan in a very small voice.

"Yes?" said Lucy.

"I see him now.  I'm sorry."

"That's all right."

"But I've been far worse than you know.  I really believed it was
him--he, I mean--yesterday.  When he warned us not to go down to the
fir wood.  And I really believed it was him to-night, when you woke us
up.  I mean, deep down inside.  Or I could have, if I'd let myself.
But I just wanted to get out of the woods and--and--oh, I don't know.
And what ever am I to say to him?"

"Perhaps you won't need to say much," suggested Lucy.

Soon they reached the trees and through them the children could see the
Great Mound, Aslan's How, which had been raised over the Table since
their days.

"Our side don't keep very good watch," muttered Trumpkin.  "We ought to
have been challenged before now----"

"Hush!" said the other four, for now Aslan had stopped and turned and
stood facing them, looking so majestic that they felt as glad as anyone
can who feels afraid, and as afraid as anyone can who feels glad.  The
boys strode forward: Lucy made way for them: Susan and the Dwarf shrank
back.

"Oh, Aslan," said King Peter, dropping on one knee and raising the
Lion's heavy paw to his face, "I'm so glad.  And I'm so sorry.  I've
been leading them wrong ever since we started and especially yesterday
morning."

"My dear son," said Aslan.

Then he turned and welcomed Edmund.  "Well done," were his words.

Then, after an awful pause, the deep voice said, "Susan."  Susan made
no answer but the others thought she was crying.  "You have listened to
fears, child," said Aslan.  "Come, let me breathe on you.  Forget them.
Are you brave again?"

"A little, Aslan," said Susan.

"And now!" said Aslan in a much louder voice with just a hint of a roar
in it, while his tail lashed his flanks.  "And now, where is this
little Dwarf, this famous swordsman and archer, who doesn't believe in
lions?  Come here, son of Earth, come HERE!"--and the last word was no
longer the hint of a roar but almost the real thing.

"Wraiths and wreckage!" gasped Trumpkin in the ghost of a voice.  The
children, who knew Aslan well enough to see that he liked the Dwarf
very much, were not disturbed; but it was quite another thing for
Trumpkin, who had never seen a lion before, let alone this Lion.  He
did the only sensible thing he could have done; that is, instead of
bolting, he tottered towards Aslan.

Aslan pounced.  Have you ever seen a very young kitten being carried in
the mother cat's mouth?  It was like that.  The Dwarf, hunched up in a
little, miserable ball, hung from Aslan's mouth.  The Lion gave him one
shake and all his armour rattled like a tinker's pack and
then--hey-presto--the Dwarf flew up in the air.  He was as safe as if
he had been in bed, though he did not feel so.  As he came down the
huge velvety paws caught him as gently as a mother's arms and set him
(right way up, too) on the ground.

"Son of Earth, shall we be friends?" asked Aslan.

"Ye--he--he--hes," panted the Dwarf, for it had not yet got its breath
back.

"Now," said Aslan.  "The Moon is setting.  Look behind you: there is
the dawn beginning.  We have no time to lose.  You three, you sons of
Adam and son of Earth, hasten into the Mound and deal with what you
will find there."

The Dwarf was still speechless and neither of the boys dared to ask if
Aslan would follow them.  All three drew their swords and saluted, then
turned and jingled away into the dusk.  Lucy noticed that there was no
sign of weariness in their faces: both the High King and King Edmund
looked more like men than boys.

The girls watched them out of sight, standing close beside Aslan.  The
light was changing.  Low down in the east, Aravir, the morning star of
Narnia, gleamed like a little moon.  Aslan, who seemed larger than
before, lifted his head, shook his mane and roared.

The sound, deep and throbbing at first like an organ beginning on a low
note, rose and became louder, and then far louder again, till the earth
and air were shaking with it.  It rose up from that hill and floated
across all Narnia.  Down in Miraz's camp men woke, stared palely in one
another's faces, and grasped their weapons.  Down below that in the
Great River, now at its coldest hour, the heads and shoulders of the
nymphs, and the great weedy-bearded head of the river-god, rose from
the water.  Beyond it, in every field and wood, the alert ears of
rabbits rose from their holes, the sleepy heads of birds came out from
under wings, owls hooted, vixens barked, hedgehogs grunted, the trees
stirred.  In towns and villages mothers pressed babies close to their
breasts, staring with wild eyes, dogs whimpered, and men leaped up
groping for lights.  Far away on the northern frontier the mountain
giants peered from the dark gateways of their castles.

What Lucy and Susan saw was a dark something coming to them from almost
every direction across the hills.  It looked first like a black mist
creeping on the ground, then like the stormy waves of a black sea
rising higher and higher as it came on, and then, at last, like what it
was--woods on the move.  All the trees of the world appeared to be
rushing towards Aslan.  But as they drew nearer they looked less like
trees, and when the whole crowd, bowing and curtsying and waving thin
long arms to Aslan, were all around Lucy, she saw that it was a crowd
of human shapes.  Pale birch-girls were tossing their heads,
willow-women pushed back their hair from their brooding faces to gaze
on Aslan, the queenly beeches stood still and adored him, shaggy
oak-men, lean and melancholy elms, shock-headed hollies (dark
themselves, but their wives all bright with berries) and gay rowans,
all bowed and rose again, shouting, "Aslan, Aslan!" in their various
husky or creaking or wave-like voices.

The crowd and the dance round Aslan (for it had become a dance once
more) grew so thick and rapid that Lucy was confused.  She never saw
where certain other people came from who were soon capering about among
the trees.  One was a youth, dressed only in a fawn-skin, with
vine-leaves wreathed in his curly hair.  His face would have been
almost too pretty for a boy's, if it had not looked so extremely wild.
You felt, as Edmund said when he saw him a few days later, "There's a
chap who might do anything--absolutely anything."  He seemed to have a
great many names--Bromios, Bassareus, and the Ram were three of them.
There were a lot of girls with him, as wild as he.  There was even,
unexpectedly, someone on a donkey.  And everybody was laughing: and
every body was shouting out, "Euan, euan, eu-oi-oi-oi."

"Is it a Romp, Aslan?" cried the youth.  And apparently it was.  But
nearly everyone seemed to have a different idea as to what they were
playing.  It may have been Tig, but Lucy never discovered who was It.
It was rather like Blind Man's Buff, only everyone behaved as if they
were blindfolded.  It was not unlike Hunt the Slipper, but the slipper
was never found.  What made it more complicated was that the man on the
donkey, who was old and enormously fat, began calling out at once,
"Refreshments!  Time for refreshments," and falling off his donkey and
being bundled on to it again by the others, while the donkey was under
the impression that the whole thing was a circus, and tried to give a
display of walking on its hind legs.  And all the time there were more
and more vine leaves everywhere.  And soon not only leaves but vines.
They were climbing up everything.  They were running up the legs of the
tree people and circling round their necks.  Lucy put up her hands to
push back her hair and found she was pushing back vine branches.  The
donkey was a mass of them.  His tail was completely entangled and
something dark was nodding between his ears.  Lucy looked again and saw
it was a bunch of grapes.  After that it was mostly grapes--overhead
and underfoot and all around.

"Refreshments!  Refreshments," roared the old man.  Everyone began
eating, and whatever hothouses your people may have, you have never
tasted such grapes.  Really good grapes, firm and tight on the outside,
but bursting into cool sweetness when you put them into your mouth,
were one of the things the girls had never had quite enough of before.
Here, there were more than anyone could possibly want, and no
table-manners at all.  One saw sticky and stained fingers everywhere,
and, though mouths were full, the laughter never ceased nor the
yodelling cries of _Euan, euan, eu-oi-oi-oi-oi_, till all of a sudden
everyone felt at the same moment that the game (whatever it was), and
the feast, ought to be over, and everyone flopped down breathless on
the ground and turned their faces to Aslan to hear what he would say
next.

At that moment the sun was just rising and Lucy remembered something
and whispered to Susan,

"I say, Su, I know who they are."

"Who?"

"The boy with the wild face is Bacchus and the old one on the donkey is
Silenus.  Don't you remember Mr Tumnus telling us about them long ago?"

"Yes, of course.  But I say, Lu----"

"What?"

"I wouldn't have felt very safe with Bacchus and all his wild girls if
we'd met them without Aslan."

"I should think not," said Lucy.




_Chapter XII_

SORCERY AND SUDDEN VENGEANCE

Meanwhile Trumpkin and the two boys arrived at the dark little stone
archway which led into the inside of the Mound, and two sentinel
badgers (the white patches on their cheeks were all Edmund could see of
them) leaped up with bared teeth and asked them in snarling voices,
"Who goes there?"

"Trumpkin," said the Dwarf.  "Bringing the High King of Narnia out of
the far past."

The badgers nosed at the boys' hands.  "At last," they said.  "At last."

"Give us a light, friends," said Trumpkin.

The badgers found a torch just inside the arch and Peter lit it and
handed it to Trumpkin.  "The D.L.F. had better lead," he said.  "We
don't know our way about this place."

Trumpkin took the torch and went ahead into the dark tunnel.  It was a
cold, black, musty place, with an occasional bat fluttering in the
torchlight, and plenty of cobwebs.  The boys, who had been mostly in
the open air since that morning at the railway station, felt as if they
were going into a trap or a prison.

"I say, Peter," whispered Edmund.  "Look at those carvings on the
walls.  Don't they look old?  And yet we're older than that.  When we
were last here, they hadn't been made."

"Yes," said Peter.  "That makes one think."

The Dwarf went on ahead and then turned to the right, and then to the
left, and then down some steps, and then to the left again.  Then at
last they saw a light ahead--light from under a door.  And now for the
first time they heard voices, for they had come to the door of the
central chamber.  The voices inside were angry ones.  Someone was
talking so loudly that the approach of the boys and the Dwarf had not
been heard.

"Don't like the sound of that," whispered Trumpkin to Peter.  "Let's
listen for a moment."  All three stood perfectly still on the outside
of the door.

"You know well enough," said a voice ("That's the King," whispered
Trumpkin), "why the Horn was not blown at sunrise that morning.  Have
you forgotten that Miraz fell upon us almost before Trumpkin had gone,
and we were fighting for our lives for the space of three hours and
more?  I blew it when first I had a breathing space."

"I'm not likely to forget it," came the angry voice, "when my Dwarfs
bore the brunt of the attack and one in five of them fell."  ("That's
Nikabrik," whispered Trumpkin.)

"For shame, Dwarf," came a thick voice ("Trufflehunter's," said
Trumpkin).  "We all did as much as the Dwarfs and none more than the
King."

"Tell that tale your own way for all I care," answered Nikabrik.  "But
whether it was that the Horn was blown too late, or whether there was
no magic in it, no help has come.  You, you great clerk, you master
magician, you know-all; are you still asking us to hang our hopes on
Aslan and King Peter and all the rest of it?"

"I must confess--I cannot deny it--that I am deeply disappointed in the
result of the operation," came the answer.  ("That'll be Doctor
Cornelius," said Trumpkin.)

"To speak plainly," said Nikabrik, "your wallet's empty, your eggs
addled, your fish uncaught, your promises broken.  Stand aside then and
let others work.  And that is why----"

"The help will come," said Trufflehunter.  "I stand by Aslan.  Have
patience, like us beasts.  The help will come.  It may be even now at
the door."

"Pah!" snarled Nikabrik.  "You badgers would have us wait till the sky
falls and we can all catch larks.  I tell you we can't wait.  Food is
running short; we lose more than we can afford at every encounter; our
followers are slipping away."

"And why?" asked Trufflehunter.  "I'll tell you why.  Because it is
noised among them that we have called on the Kings of old and the Kings
of old have not answered.  The last words Trumpkin spoke before he went
(and went, most likely, to his death) were, 'If you must blow the Horn,
do not let the army know why you blow it or what you hope from it.'
But that same evening everyone seemed to know."

"You'd better have shoved your grey snout in a hornets' nest, Badger,
than suggest that I am the blab," said Nikabrik.  "Take it back, or----"

"Oh, stop it, both of you," said King Caspian.  "I want to know what it
is that Nikabrik keeps on hinting we should do.  But before that, I
want to know who those two strangers are whom he has brought into our
council and who stand there with their ears open and their mouths shut."

"They are friends of mine," said Nikabrik.  "And what better right have
you yourself to be here than that you are a friend of Trumpkin's and
the Badger's?  And what right has that old dotard in the black gown to
be here except that he is your friend?  Why am I to be the only one who
can't bring in his friends?"

"His Majesty is the King to whom you have sworn allegiance," said
Trufflehunter sternly.

"Court manners, court manners," sneered Nikabrik.  "But in this hole we
may talk plainly.  You know--and he knows--that this Telmarine boy will
be king of nowhere and nobody in a week unless we can help him out of
the trap in which he sits."

"Perhaps," said Cornelius, "your new friends would like to speak for
themselves?  You there, who and what are you?"

"Worshipful Master Doctor," came a thin, whining voice.  "So please
you, I'm only a poor old woman, I am, and very obliged to his
Worshipful Dwarfship for his friendship, I'm sure.  His Majesty, bless
his handsome face, has no need to be afraid of an old woman that's
nearly doubled up with the rheumatics and hasn't two sticks to put
under her kettle.  I have some poor little skill--not like yours,
Master Doctor, of course--in small spells and cantrips that I'd be glad
to use against our enemies if it was agreeable to all concerned.  For I
hate 'em.  Oh yes.  No one hates better than me."

"That is all most interesting and--er--satisfactory," said Doctor
Cornelius.  "I think I now know what you are, Madam.  Perhaps your
other friend, Nikabrik, would give some account of himself?"

A dull, grey voice at which Peter's flesh crept replied, "I'm hunger.
I'm thirst.  Where I bite, I hold till I die, and even after death they
must cut out my mouthful from my enemy's body and bury it with me.  I
can fast a hundred years and not die.  I can lie a hundred nights on
the ice and not freeze.  I can drink a river of blood and not burst.
Show me your enemies."

"And it is in the presence of these two that you wish to disclose your
plan?" said Caspian.

"Yes," said Nikabrik.  "And by their help that I mean to execute it."

There was a minute or two during which Trumpkin and the boys could hear
Caspian and his two friends speaking in low voices but could not make
out what they were saying.  Then Caspian spoke aloud.

"Well, Nikabrik," he said, "we will hear your plan."

There was a pause so long that the boys began to wonder if Nikabrik was
ever going to begin; when he did, it was in a lower voice, as if he
himself did not much like what he was saying.

"All said and done," he muttered, "none of us knows the truth about the
ancient days in Narnia.  Trumpkin believed none of the stories.  I was
ready to put them to the trial.  We tried first the Horn and it has
failed.  If there ever was a High King Peter and a Queen Susan and a
King Edmund and a Queen Lucy, then either they have not heard us, or
they cannot come, or they are our enemies----"

"Or they are on the way," put in Trufflehunter.

"You can go on saying that till Miraz has fed us all to his dogs.  As I
was saying, we have tried one link in the chain of old legends, and it
has done us no good.  Well.  But when your sword breaks, you draw your
dagger.  The stories tell of other powers beside the ancient Kings and
Queens.  How if we could call _them_ up?"

"If you mean Aslan," said Trufflehunter, "it's all one calling on him
and on the Kings.  They were his servants.  If he will not send them
(but I make no doubt he will), is he more likely to come himself?"

"No.  You're right there," said Nikabrik.  "Aslan and the Kings go
together.  Either Aslan is dead, or he is not on our side.  Or else
something stronger than himself keeps him back.  And if he did
come--how do we know he'd be our friend?  He was not always a good
friend to Dwarfs by all that's told.  Not even to all beasts.  Ask the
Wolves.  And anyway, he was in Narnia only once that I ever heard of,
and he didn't stay long.  You may drop Aslan out of the reckoning.  I
was thinking of someone else."

There was no answer, and for a few minutes it was so still that Edmund
could hear the wheezy and snuffling breath of the Badger.

"Who do you mean?" said Caspian at last.

"I mean a power so much greater than Aslan's that it held Narnia
spellbound for years and years, if the stories are true."

"The White Witch!" cried three voices all at once, and from the noise
Peter guessed that three people had leaped to their feet.

"Yes," said Nikabrik very slowly and distinctly, "I mean the Witch.
Sit down again.  Don't all take fright at a name as if you were
children.  We want power: and we want a power that will be on our side.
As for power, do not the stories say that the Witch defeated Aslan, and
bound him, and killed him on that very stone which is over there, just
beyond the light?"

"But they also say that he came to life again," said the Badger sharply.

"Yes, they _say_," answered Nikabrik, "but you'll notice that we hear
precious little about anything he did afterwards.  He just fades out of
the story.  How do you explain that, if he really came to life?  Isn't
it much more likely that he didn't, and that the stories say nothing
more about him because there was nothing more to say?"

"He established the Kings and Queens," said Caspian.

"A King who has just won a great battle can usually establish himself
without the help of a performing lion," said Nikabrik.  There was a
fierce growl, probably from Trufflehunter.

"And anyway," Nikabrik continued, "what came of the Kings and their
reign?  They faded too.  But it's very different with the Witch.  They
say she ruled for a hundred years: a hundred years of winter.  There's
power, if you like.  There's something practical."

"But, heaven and earth!" said the King, "haven't we always been told
that she was the worst enemy of all?  Wasn't she a tyrant ten times
worse than Miraz?"

"Perhaps," said Nikabrik in a cold voice.  "Perhaps she was for you
humans, if there were any of you in those days.  Perhaps she was for
some of the beasts.  She stamped out the Beavers, I dare say; at least
there are none of them in Narnia now.  But she got on all right with us
Dwarfs.  I'm a Dwarf and I stand by my own people.  _We're_ not afraid
of the Witch."

"But you've joined with us," said Trufflehunter.

"Yes, and a lot of good it has done my people, so far," snapped
Nikabrik.  "Who is sent on all the dangerous raids?  The Dwarfs.  Who
goes short when the rations fail?  The Dwarfs.  Who----"

"Lies!  All lies!" said the Badger.

"And so," said Nikabrik, whose voice now rose to a scream, "if you
can't help my people, I'll go to someone who can."

"Is this open treason, Dwarf?" asked the King.

"Put that sword back in its sheath, Caspian," said Nikabrik.  "Murder
at council, eh?  Is that your game?  Don't be fool enough to try it.
Do you think I'm afraid of you?  There's three on my side, and three on
yours."

"Come on, then," snarled Trufflehunter, but he was immediately
interrupted.

"Stop, stop, stop," said Doctor Cornelius.  "You go on too fast.  The
Witch is dead.  All the stories agree on that.  What does Nikabrik mean
by calling on the Witch?"

That grey and terrible voice which had spoken only once before said,
"Oh, _is_ she?"

And then the shrill, whining voice began, "Oh, bless his heart, his
dear little Majesty needn't mind about the White Lady--that's what _we_
call her--being dead.  The Worshipful Master Doctor is only making game
of a poor old woman like me when he says that.  Sweet Master Doctor,
learned Master Doctor, who ever heard of a witch that really died?  You
can always get them back."

"Call her up," said the grey voice.  "We are all ready.  Draw the
circle.  Prepare the blue fire."

Above the steadily increasing growl of the Badger and Cornelius's sharp
"What?" rose the voice of King Caspian like thunder.

"So that is your plan, Nikabrik!  Black sorcery and the calling up of
an accursed ghost.  And I see who your companions are--a Hag and a
Wer-Wolf!"

The next minute or so was very confused.  There was an animal roaring,
a clash of steel; the boys and Trumpkin rushed in; Peter had a glimpse
of a horrible, grey, gaunt creature, half man and half wolf, in the
very act of leaping upon a boy about his own age, and Edmund saw a
badger and a Dwarf rolling on the floor in a sort of cat fight.
Trumpkin found himself face to face with the Hag.  Her nose and chin
stuck out like a pair of nut-crackers, her dirty grey hair was flying
about her face and she had just got Doctor Cornelius by the throat.  At
one slash of Trumpkin's sword her head rolled on the floor.  Then the
light was knocked over and it was all swords, teeth, claws, fists and
boots for about sixty seconds.  Then silence.

"Are you all right, Ed?"

"I--I think so," panted Edmund.  "I've got that brute Nikabrik, but
he's still alive."

"Weights and water-bottles!" came an angry voice.  "It's _me_ you're
sitting on.  Get off.  You're like a young elephant."

"Sorry, D.L.F.," said Edmund.  "Is that better?"

"Ow!  No!" bellowed Trumpkin.  "You're putting your boot in my mouth.
Go away."

"Is King Caspian anywhere?" asked Peter.

"I'm here," said a rather faint voice.  "Something bit me."

They all heard the noise of someone striking a match.  It was Edmund.
The little flame showed his face, looking pale and dirty.  He blundered
about for a little, found the candle (they were no longer using the
lamp, for they had run out of oil), set it on the table and lit it.
When the flame rose clear, several people scrambled to their feet.  Six
faces blinked at one another in the candlelight.

"We don't seem to have any enemies left," said Peter.  "There's the
Hag, dead."  (He turned his eyes quickly away from her.)  "And
Nikabrik, dead too.  And I suppose this thing is a Wer-Wolf.  It's so
long since I've seen one.  Wolf's head and man's body.  That means he
was just turning from man into wolf at the moment he was killed.  And
you, I suppose, are King Caspian?"

"Yes," said the other boy.  "But I've no idea who you are."

"It's the High King, King Peter," said Trumpkin.

"Your Majesty is very welcome," said Caspian.

"And so is _your_ Majesty," said Peter.  "I haven't come to take your
place, you know, but to put you into it."

"Your Majesty," said another voice at Peter's elbow.  He turned and
found himself face to face with the Badger.  Peter leaned forward, put
his arms round the beast and kissed the furry head: it wasn't a girlish
thing for him to do, because he was the High King.

"Best of badgers," he said.  "You never doubted us all through."

"No credit to me, your Majesty," said Trufflehunter.  "I'm a beast and
we don't change.  I'm a badger, what's more, and we hold on."

"I am sorry for Nikabrik," said Caspian, "though he hated me from the
first moment he saw me.  He had gone sour inside from long suffering
and hating.  If we had won quickly he might have become a good Dwarf in
the days of peace.  I don't know which of us killed him.  I'm glad of
that."

"You're bleeding," said Peter.

"Yes, I'm bitten," said Caspian.  "It was that--that wolf thing."
Cleaning and bandaging the wound took a little time, and when it was
done Trumpkin said, "Now.  Before everything else we want some
breakfast."

"But not here," said Peter.

"No," said Caspian with a shudder.  "And we must send someone to take
away the bodies."

"Let the vermin be flung into a pit," said Peter.  "But the Dwarf we
will give to his people to be buried in their own fashion."

They breakfasted at last in another of the dark cellars of Aslan's How.
It was not such a breakfast as they would have chosen, for Caspian and
Cornelius were thinking of venison pasties, and Peter and Edmund of
buttered eggs and hot coffee, but what everyone got was a little bit of
cold bear-meat (out of the boys' pockets), a lump of hard cheese, an
onion, and a mug of water.  But, from the way they fell to, anyone
would have supposed it was delicious.




_Chapter XIII_

THE HIGH KING IN COMMAND

"Now," said Peter, as they finished their meal, "Aslan and the girls
(that's Queen Susan and Queen Lucy, Caspian) are somewhere close.  We
don't know when he will act.  In his time, no doubt, not ours.  In the
meantime he would like us to do what we can on our own.  You say,
Caspian, we are not strong enough to meet Miraz in pitched battle."

"I'm afraid not, High King," said Caspian.  He was liking Peter very
much, but was rather tongue-tied.  It was much stranger for him to meet
the great Kings out of the old stories than it was for them to meet him.

"Very well, then," said Peter, "I'll send him a challenge to single
combat."  No-one had thought of this before.

"Please," said Caspian, "could it not be me?  I want to avenge my
father."

"You're wounded," said Peter.  "And anyway, wouldn't he just laugh at a
challenge from you?  I mean, we have seen that you are a king and a
warrior but he thinks of you as a kid."

"But, Sire," said the Badger, who sat very close to Peter and never
took its eyes off him.  "Will he accept a challenge even from you?  He
knows he has the stronger army."

"Very likely he won't," said Peter, "but there's always the chance.
And even if he doesn't, we shall spend the best part of the day sending
heralds to and fro and all that.  By then Aslan may have done
something.  And at least I can inspect the army and strengthen the
position.  I will send the challenge.  In fact I will write it at once.
Have you pen and ink, Master Doctor?"

"A scholar is never without them, your Majesty," answered Doctor
Cornelius.

"Very well, I will dictate," said Peter.  And while the Doctor spread
out a parchment and opened his ink-horn and sharpened his pen, Peter
lent back with half-closed eyes and recalled to his mind the language
in which he had written such things long ago in Narnia's golden age.

"Right," he said at last.  "And now, if you are ready, Doctor?"

Doctor Cornelius dipped his pen and waited.  Peter dictated as follows:

"_Peter, by the gift of Aslan, by election, by prescription, and by
conquest, High King over all Kings in Narnia, Emperor of the Lone
Islands and Lord of Cair Paravel, Knight of the Most Noble Order of the
Lion, to Miraz, Son of Caspian the Eighth, sometime Lord Protector of
Narnia and now styling himself King of Narnia, Greeting_.  Have you got
that?"

"_Narnia, comma, greeting,_" muttered the Doctor.  "Yes, Sire."

"Then begin a new paragraph," said Peter.  "_For to prevent the
effusion of blood, and for the avoiding all other inconveniences likely
to grow from the wars now levied in our realm of Narnia, it is our
pleasure to adventure our royal person on behalf of our trusty and
well-beloved Caspian in clean wager of battle to prove upon your
Lordship's body that the said Caspian is lawful King under us in Narnia
both by our gift and by the laws of the Telmarines, and your Lordship
twice guilty of treachery both in withholding the dominion of Narnia
from the said Caspian and in the most abhominable,_--don't forget to
spell it with an H, Doctor--_bloody, and unnatural murder of your
kindly lord and brother King Caspian Ninth of that name.  Wherefore we
most heartily provoke, challenge and defy your Lordship to the said
combat and monomachy, and have sent these letters by the hand of our
well beloved and royal brother Edmund, sometime King under us in
Narnia, Duke of Lantern Waste and Count of the Western March, Knight of
the Noble Order of the Table, to whom we have given full power of
determining with your Lordship all the conditions of the said battle.
Given at our lodging in Aslan's How this XII day of the month Greenroof
in the first year of Caspian Tenth of Narnia_.

"That ought to do," said Peter, drawing a deep breath.  "And now we
must send two others with King Edmund.  I think the Giant ought to be
one."

"He's--he's not very clever, you know," said Caspian.

"Of course not," said Peter.  "But any giant looks impressive if only
he will keep quiet.  And it will cheer him up.  But who for the other?"

"Upon my word," said Trumpkin, "if you want someone who can kill with
looks, Reepicheep would be the best."

"He would indeed, from all I hear," said Peter with a laugh.  "If only
he wasn't so small.  They wouldn't even see him till he was close!"

"Send Glenstorm, Sire," said Trufflehunter.  "No one ever laughed at a
Centaur."

An hour later two great lords in the army of Miraz, the Lord Glozelle
and the Lord Sopespian, strolling along their lines and picking their
teeth after breakfast, looked up and saw coming down to them from the
wood the Centaur and Giant Wimbleweather, whom they had seen before in
battle, and between them a figure they could not recognise.  Nor indeed
would the other boys at Edmund's school have recognised him if they
could have seen him at that moment.  For Aslan had breathed on him at
their meeting and a kind of greatness hung about him.

"What's to do?" said the Lord Glozelle.  "An attack?"

"A parley, rather," said Sopespian.  "See, they carry green branches.
They are coming to surrender most likely."

"He that is walking between the Centaur and the Giant has no look of
surrender in his face," said Glozelle.  "Who can he be?  It is not the
boy Caspian."

"No indeed," said Sopespian.  "This is a fell warrior, I warrant you,
wherever the rebels have got him from.  He is (in your Lordship's
private ear) a kinglier man than ever Miraz was.  And what mail he
wears!  None of our smiths can make the like."

"I'll wager my dappled Pomely he brings a challenge, not a surrender,"
said Glozelle.

"How then?" said Sopespian.  "We hold the enemy in our fist here.
Miraz would never be so hair-brained as to throw away his advantage on
a combat."

"He might be brought to it," said Glozelle in a much lower voice.

"Softly," said Sopespian.  "Step a little aside here out of earshot of
those sentries.  Now.  Have I taken your Lordship's meaning aright?"

"If the King undertook wager of battle," whispered Glozelle, "why,
either he would kill or be killed."

"So," said Sopespian, nodding his head.

"And if he killed we should have won this war."

"Certainly.  And if not?"

"Why, if not, we should be as able to win it without the King's grace
as with him.  For I need not tell your Lordship that Miraz is no very
great captain.  And after that, we should be both victorious and
kingless."

"And it is your meaning, my Lord, that you and I could hold this land
quite as conveniently without a King as with one?"

Glozelle's face grew ugly.  "Not forgetting," said he, "that it was we
who first put him on the throne.  And in all the years that he has
enjoyed it, what fruits have come our way?  What gratitude has he shown
us?"

"Say no more," answered Sopespian.  "But look--here comes one to fetch
us to the King's tent."

When they reached Miraz's tent they saw Edmund and his two companions
seated outside it and being entertained with cakes and wine, having
already delivered the challenge, and withdrawn while the King was
considering it.  When they saw them thus at close quarters the two
Telmarine lords thought all three of them very alarming.

Inside, they found Miraz, unarmed and finishing his breakfast.  His
face was flushed and there was a scowl on his brow.

"There!" he growled, flinging the parchment across the table to them.
"See what a pack of nursery tales our jackanapes of a nephew has sent
us."

"By your leave, Sire," said Glozelle.  "If the young warrior whom we
have just seen outside is the King Edmund mentioned in the writing,
then I would not call him a nursery tale but a very dangerous knight."

"King Edmund, pah!" said Miraz.  "Does your Lordship believe those old
wives' fables about Peter and Edmund and the rest?"

"I believe my eyes, your Majesty," said Glozelle.

"Well, this is to no purpose," said Miraz, "but as touching the
challenge, I suppose there is only one opinion between us?"

"I suppose so, indeed, Sire," said Glozelle.

"And what is that?" asked the King.

"Most infallibly to refuse it," said Glozelle.  "For though I have
never been called a coward, I must plainly say that to meet that young
man in battle is more than my heart would serve me for.  And if (as is
likely) his brother, the High King, is more dangerous than he--why, on
your life, my Lord King, have nothing to do with him."

"Plague on you!" cried Miraz.  "It was not that sort of council I
wanted.  Do you think I am asking you if I should be afraid to meet
this Peter (if there is such a man)?  Do you think I fear him?  I
wanted your counsel on the policy of the matter; whether we, having the
advantage, should hazard it on a wager of battle."

"To which I can only answer, your Majesty," said Glozelle, "that for
all reasons the challenge should be refused.  There is death in the
strange knight's face."

"There you are again!" said Miraz, now thoroughly angry.  "Are you
trying to make it appear that I am as great a coward as your Lordship?"

"Your Majesty may say your pleasure," said Glozelle sulkily.

"You talk like an old woman, Glozelle," said the King.  "What say you,
my Lord Sopespian?"

"Do not touch it, Sire," was the reply.  "And what your Majesty says of
the policy of the thing comes in very happily.  It gives your Majesty
excellent grounds for a refusal without any cause for questioning your
Majesty's honour or courage."

"Great Heaven!" exclaimed Miraz, jumping to his feet.  "Are you also
bewitched to-day?  Do you think I am looking for grounds to refuse it?
You might as well call me coward to my face."

The conversation was going exactly as the two lords wished, so they
said nothing.

"I see what it is," said Miraz, after staring at them as if his eyes
would start out of his head, "you are as lily-livered as hares
yourselves and have the effrontery to imagine my heart after the
likeness of yours!  Grounds for a refusal, indeed!  Excuses for not
fighting!  Are you soldiers?  Are you Telmarines?  Are you men?  And if
I do refuse it (as all good reasons of captaincy and martial policy
urge me to do) you will think, and teach others to think, I was afraid.
Is it not so?"

"No man of your Majesty's age," said Glozelle, "would be called coward
by any wise soldier for refusing the combat with a great warrior in the
flower of his youth."

"So I'm to be a dotard with one foot in the grave, as well as a
dastard," roared Miraz.  "I'll tell you what it is, my Lords.  With
your womanish counsels (ever shying from the true point, which is one
of policy) you have done the very opposite of your intent.  I had meant
to refuse it.  But I'll accept it.  Do you hear, accept it!  I'll not
be shamed because some witchcraft or treason has frozen both your
bloods."

"We beseech your Majesty----" said Glozelle, but Miraz had flung out of
the tent and they could hear him bawling out his acceptance to Edmund.

The two lords looked at one another and chuckled quietly.

"I knew he'd do it if he were properly chafed," said Glozelle.  "But
I'll not forget he called me coward.  It shall be paid for."

There was a great stirring at Aslan's How when the news came back and
was communicated to the various creatures.  Edmund, with one of Miraz's
captains, had already marked out the place for the combat, and ropes
and stakes had been put round it.  Two Telmarines were to stand at two
of the corners, and one in the middle of one side, as marshals of the
lists.  Three marshals for the other two corners and the other side
were to be furnished by the High King.  Peter was just explaining to
Caspian that he could not be one, because his right to the throne was
what they were fighting about, when suddenly a thick, sleepy voice
said, "Your Majesty, please."  Peter turned and there stood the eldest
of the Bulgy Bears.  "If you please, your Majesty," he said, "I'm a
bear, I am."

"To be sure, so you are, and a good bear too, I don't doubt," said
Peter.

"Yes," said the Bear.  "But it was always a right of the bears to
supply one marshal of the lists."

"Don't let him," whispered Trumpkin to Peter.  "He's a good creature,
but he'll shame us all.  He'll go to sleep and he will suck his paws.
In front of the enemy too."

"I can't help that," said Peter.  "Because he's quite right.  The Bears
had that privilege.  I can't imagine how it has been remembered all
these years, when so many other things have been forgotten."

"Please, your Majesty," said the Bear.

"It is your right," said Peter.  "And you shall be one of the marshals.
But you must remember not to suck your paws."

"Of course not," said the Bear in a very shocked voice.

"Why, you're doing it this minute!" bellowed Trumpkin.

The Bear whipped his paw out of his mouth and pretended he hadn't heard.

"Sire!" came a shrill voice from near the ground.

"Ah--Reepicheep!" said Peter after looking up and down and round as
people usually did when addressed by the Mouse.

"Sire," said Reepicheep.  "My life is ever at your command, but my
honour is my own.  Sire, I have among my people the only trumpeter in
your Majesty's army.  I had thought, perhaps, we might have been sent
with the challenge.  Sire, my people are grieved.  Perhaps if it were
your pleasure that I should be a marshal of the lists, it would content
them."

A noise not unlike thunder broke out from somewhere overhead at this
point, as Giant Wimbleweather burst into one of those not very
intelligent laughs to which the nicer sorts of Giant are so liable.  He
checked himself at once and looked as grave as a turnip by the time
Reepicheep discovered where the noise came from.

"I am afraid it would not do," said Peter very gravely.  "Some humans
are afraid of mice----"

"I had observed it, Sire," said Reepicheep.

"And it would not be quite fair to Miraz," Peter continued, "to have in
sight anything that might abate the edge of his courage."

"Your Majesty is the mirror of honour," said the Mouse with one of his
admirable bows.  "And on this matter we have but a single mind....  I
thought I heard someone laughing just now.  If anyone present wishes to
make me the subject of his wit, I am very much at his service--with my
sword--whenever he has leisure."

An awful silence followed this remark, which was broken by Peter
saying, "Giant Wimbleweather and the Bear and the Centaur Glenstorm
shall be our marshals.  The combat will be at two hours after noon.
Dinner at noon precisely."

"I say," said Edmund as they walked away, "I suppose it is all right.
I mean, I suppose you can beat him?"

"That's what I'm fighting him to find out," said Peter.




_Chapter XIV_

HOW ALL WERE VERY BUSY

A little before two o'clock Trumpkin and the Badger sat with the rest
of the creatures at the wood's edge looking across at the gleaming line
of Miraz's army which was about two arrow-shots away.  In between, a
square space of level grass had been staked for the combat.  At the two
far corners stood Glozelle and Sopespian with drawn swords.  At the
near corners were Giant Wimbleweather and the Bulgy Bear, who in spite
of all their warnings was sucking his paws and looking, to tell the
truth, uncommonly silly.  To make up for this, Glenstorm on the right
of the lists, stock-still except when he stamped a hind hoof
occasionally on the turf, looked much more imposing than the Telmarine
baron who faced him on the left.  Peter had just shaken hands with
Edmund and the Doctor, and was now walking down to the combat.  It was
like the moment before the pistol goes at an important race, but very
much worse.

"I wish Aslan had turned up before it came to this," said Trumpkin.

"So do I," said Trufflehunter.  "But look behind you."

"Crows and crockery!" muttered the Dwarf as soon as he had done so.
"What are they?  Huge people--beautiful people--like gods and goddesses
and giants.  Hundreds and thousands of them, closing in behind us.
What are they?"

"It's the Dryads and Hamadryads and Silvans," said.  Trufflehunter.
"Aslan has waked them."

"Humph!" said the Dwarf.  "That'll be very useful if the enemy try any
treachery.  But it won't help the High King very much if Miraz proves
handier with his sword."

The Badger said nothing, for now Peter and Miraz were entering the
lists from opposite ends, both on foot, both in chain shirts, with
helmets and shields.  They advanced till they were close together.
Both bowed and seemed to speak, but it was impossible to hear what they
said.  Next moment the two swords flashed in the sunlight.  For a
second the clash could be heard but it was immediately drowned because
both armies began shouting like crowds at a football match.

"Well done, Peter, oh, well done!" shouted Edmund as he saw Miraz reel
back a whole pace and a half.  "Follow it up, quick!"  And Peter did,
and for a few seconds it looked as if the fight might be won.  But then
Miraz pulled himself together--began to make real use of his height and
weight.  "Miraz!  Miraz!  The King!  The King!" came the roar of the
Telmarines.  Caspian and Edmund grew white with sickening anxiety.

"Peter is taking some dreadful knocks," said Edmund.

"Hullo!" said Caspian.  "What's happening now?"

"Both falling apart," said Edmund.  "A bit blown, I expect.  Watch.
Ah, now they're beginning again, more scientifically this time.
Circling round and round, feeling each other's defences."

"I'm afraid this Miraz knows his work," muttered the Doctor.  But
hardly had he said this when there was such a clapping and baying and
throwing up of hoods among the Old Narnians that it was nearly
deafening.

"What was it?  What was it?" asked the Doctor.  "My old eyes missed it."

"The High King has pricked him in the arm-pit," said Caspian, still
clapping.  "Just where the arm-hole of the hauberk let the point
through.  First blood."

"It's looking ugly again now, though," said Edmund.  "Peter's not using
his shield properly.  He must be hurt in the left arm."

It was only too true.  Everyone could see that Peter's shield hung
limp.  The shouting of the Telmarines redoubled.

"You've seen more battles than I," said Caspian.  "Is there any chance
now?"

"Precious little," said Edmund.  "I suppose he might _just_ do it.
With luck."

"Oh, why did we let it happen at all?" said Caspian.

Suddenly all the shouting on both sides died down.  Edmund was puzzled
for a moment.  Then he said, "Oh, I see.  They've both agreed to a
rest.  Come on, Doctor.  You and I may be able to do something for the
High King."  They ran down to the lists and Peter came outside the
ropes to meet them, his face red and sweaty, his chest heaving.

"Is your left arm wounded?" asked Edmund.

"It's not exactly a wound," Peter said.  "I got the full weight of his
shoulder on my shield--like a load of bricks--and the rim of the shield
drove into my wrist.  I don't think it's broken, but it might be a
sprain.  If you could tie it up very tight I think I could manage."

While they were doing this, Edmund asked anxiously, "What do you think
of him, Peter?"

"Tough," said Peter.  "Very tough.  I have a chance if I can keep him
on the hop till his weight and short wind come against him--in this hot
sun too.  To tell the truth, I haven't much chance else.  Give my love
to--to everyone at home, Ed, if he gets me.  Here he comes into the
lists again.  So long, old chap.  Good-bye, Doctor.  And I say, Ed, say
something specially nice to Trumpkin.  He's been a brick."

Edmund couldn't speak.  He walked back with the Doctor to his own lines
with a sick feeling in his stomach.

But the new bout went well.  Peter now seemed to be able to make some
use of his shield, and he certainly made good use of his feet.  He was
almost playing Tig with Miraz now, keeping out of range, shifting his
ground, making the enemy work.

"Coward!" booed the Telmarines.  "Why don't you stand up to him?  Don't
you like it, eh?  Thought you'd come to fight, not dance.  Yah!"

"Oh, I do hope he won't listen to them," said Caspian.

"Not he," said Edmund.  "You don't know him--Oh!"--for Miraz had got in
a blow at last, on Peter's helmet.  Peter staggered, slipped sideways
and fell on one knee.  The roar of the Telmarines rose like the noise
of the sea.  "Now, Miraz," they yelled.  "Now.  Quick!  Quick!  Kill
him."  But indeed there was no need to egg the usurper on.  He was on
top of Peter already.  Edmund bit his lips till the blood came, as the
sword flashed down on Peter.  It looked as if it would slash off his
head.  Thank heavens!  it had glanced down his right shoulder.  The
Dwarf-wrought mail was sound and did not break.

"Great Scott!" cried Edmund.  "He's up again.  Peter, go it, Peter."

"I couldn't see what happened," said the Doctor.  "How did he do it?"

"Grabbed Miraz's arm as it came down," said Trumpkin, dancing with
delight.  "There's a man for you!  Uses his enemy's arm as a ladder.
The High King!  The High King!  Up, Old Narnia!"

"Look," said Trufflehunter.  "Miraz is angry.  It is good."

They were certainly at it hammer and tongs now: such a flurry of blows
that it seemed impossible for either not to be killed.  As the
excitement grew, the shouting almost died away.  The spectators were
holding their breath.  It was most horrible and most magnificent.

A great shout arose from the Old Narnians.  Miraz was down--not struck
by Peter, but face downwards, having tripped on a tussock.  Peter
stepped back, waiting for him to rise.

"Oh bother, bother, bother," said Edmund to himself.  "Need he be as
gentlemanly as all that?  I suppose he must.  Comes of being a Knight
_and_ a High King.  I suppose it is what Aslan would like.  But that
brute will be up again in a minute and then----"

But "that brute" never rose.  The Lords Glozelle and Sopespian had
their own plans ready.  As soon as they saw their King down they leaped
into the lists crying, "Treachery!  Treachery!  The Narnian traitor has
stabbed him in the back while he lay helpless.  To arms!  To arms,
Telmar!"

Peter hardly understood what was happening.  He saw two big men running
towards him with drawn swords.  Then the third Telmarine had leaped
over the ropes on his left.  "To arms, Narnia!  Treachery!" Peter
shouted.  If all three had set upon him at once he would never have
spoken again.  But Glozelle stopped to stab his own King dead where he
lay: "That's for your insult, this morning," he whispered as the blade
went home.  Peter swung to face Sopespian, slashed his legs from under
him and, with the back-cut of the same stroke, walloped off his head.
Edmund was now at his side crying, "Narnia, Narnia!  The Lion!"  The
whole Telmarine army was rushing towards them.  But now the Giant was
stamping forward, stooping low and swinging his club.  The Centaurs
charged.  _Twang, twang_ behind and _hiss, hiss_ overhead came the
archery of Dwarfs.  Trumpkin was fighting at his left.  Full battle was
joined.

"Come back, Reepicheep, you little ass!" shouted Peter.  "You'll only
be killed.  This is no place for mice."  But the ridiculous little
creatures were dancing in and out among the feet of both armies,
jabbing with their swords.  Many a Telmarine warrior that day felt his
foot suddenly pierced as if by a dozen skewers, hopped on one leg
cursing the pain, and fell as often as not.  If he fell, the mice
finished him off; if he did not, someone else did.

But almost before the old Narnians were really warmed to their work
they found the enemy giving way.  Tough-looking warriors turned white,
gazed in terror not on the Old Narnians but on something behind them,
and then flung down their weapons, shrieking, "The Wood!  The Wood!
The end of the world!"

But soon neither their cries nor the sound of weapons could be heard
any more, for both were drowned in the ocean-like roar of the Awakened
Trees as they plunged through the ranks of Peter's army, and then on,
in pursuit of the Telmarines.  Have you ever stood at the edge of a
great wood on a high ridge when a wild south-wester broke over it in
full fury on an autumn evening?  Imagine that sound.  And then imagine
that the wood, instead of being fixed to one place, was rushing at you;
and was no longer trees but huge people; yet still like trees because
their long arms waved like branches and their heads tossed and leaves
fell round them in showers.  It was like that for the Telmarines.  It
was a little alarming even for the Narnians.  In a few minutes all
Miraz's followers were running down to the Great River in the hope of
crossing the bridge to the town of Beruna and there defending
themselves behind ramparts and closed gates.

They reached the river, but there was no bridge.  It had disappeared
since yesterday.  Then utter panic and horror fell upon them and they
all surrendered.

But what had happened to the bridge?

Early that morning, after a few hours' sleep, the girls had waked, to
see Aslan standing over them and to hear his voice saying, "We will
make holiday."  They rubbed their eyes and looked round them.  The
trees had all gone but could still be seen moving away towards Aslan's
How in a dark mass.  Bacchus and the Maenads--his fierce, madcap
girls--and Silenus were still with them.  Lucy, fully rested, jumped
up.  Everyone was awake, everyone was laughing, flutes were playing,
cymbals clashing.  Animals, not Talking Animals, were crowding in upon
them from every direction.

"What is it, Aslan?" said Lucy, her eyes dancing and her feet wanting
to dance.

"Come, children," said he.  "Ride on my back again to-day."

"Oh, lovely!" cried Lucy, and both girls climbed on to the warm golden
back as they had done no-one knew how many years before.  Then the
whole party moved off--Aslan leading, Bacchus and his Maenads leaping,
rushing, and turning somersaults, the beasts frisking round them, and
Silenus and his donkey bringing up the rear.

They turned a little to the right, raced down a steep hill, and found
the long Bridge of Beruna in front of them.  Before they had begun to
cross it, however, up out of the water came a great wet, bearded head,
larger than a man's, crowned with rushes.  It looked at Aslan and out
of its mouth a deep voice came.

"Hail, Lord," it said.  "Loose my chains."

"Who on earth is _that_?" whispered Susan.

"I think it's the river-god, but hush," said Lucy.

"Bacchus," said Aslan.  "Deliver him from his chains."

"That means the bridge, I expect," thought Lucy.  And so it did.
Bacchus and his people splashed forward into the shallow water, and a
minute later the most curious things began happening.  Great, strong
trunks of ivy came curling up all the piers of the bridge, growing as
quickly as a fire grows, wrapping the stones round, splitting,
breaking, separating them.  The walls of the bridge turned into hedges
gay with hawthorn for a moment and then disappeared as the whole thing
with a rush and a rumble collapsed into the swirling water.  With much
splashing, screaming, and laughter the revellers waded or swam or
danced across the ford ("Hurrah!  It's the Ford of Beruna again now!"
cried the girls) and up the bank on the far side and into the town.

Everyone in the streets fled before their faces.  The first house they
came to was a school: a girls' school, where a lot of Narnian girls,
with their hair done very tight and ugly tight collars round their
necks and thick tickly stockings on their legs, were having a history
lesson.  The sort of "History" that was taught in Narnia under Miraz's
rule was duller than the truest history you ever read and less true
than the most exciting adventure story.

"If you don't attend, Gwendolen," said the mistress, "and stop looking
out of the window, I shall have to give you an order-mark."

"But please, Miss Frizzle----" began Gwendolen.

"Did you hear what I said, Gwendolen?" asked Miss Frizzle.

"But please, Miss Frizzle," said Gwendolen, "there's a LION!"

"Take two order-marks for talking nonsense," said Miss Frizzle.  "And
now----"  A roar interrupted her.  Ivy came curling in at the windows
of the classroom.  The walls became a mass of shimmering green, and
leafy branches arched overhead where the ceiling had been.  Miss
Frizzle found she was standing on grass in a forest glade.  She
clutched at her desk to steady herself, and found that the desk was a
rose-bush.  Wild people such as she had never even imagined were
crowding round her.  Then she saw the Lion, screamed and fled, and with
her fled her class, who were mostly dumpy, prim little girls with fat
legs.  Gwendolen hesitated.

"You'll stay with us, sweetheart?" said Aslan.

"Oh, may I?  Thank you, thank you," said Gwendolen.  Instantly she
joined hands with two of the Maenads, who whirled her round in a merry
dance and helped her take off some of the unnecessary and uncomfortable
clothes that she was wearing.

Wherever they went in the little town of Beruna it was the same.  Most
of the people fled, a few joined them.  When they left the town they
were a larger and a merrier company.

They swept on across the level fields on the north bank, or left bank,
of the river.  At every farm animals came out to join them.  Sad old
donkeys who had never known joy grew suddenly young again; chained dogs
broke their chains; horses kicked their carts to pieces and came
trotting along with them--clop-clop--kicking up the mud and whinnying.

At a well in a yard they met a man who was beating a boy.  The stick
burst into flower in the man's hand.  He tried to drop it, but it stuck
to his hand.  His arm became a branch, his body the trunk of a tree,
his feet took root.  The boy, who had been crying a moment before,
burst out laughing and joined them.

At a little town half-way to Beaversdam, where two rivers met, they
came to another school, where a tired-looking girl was teaching
arithmetic to a number of boys who looked very like pigs.  She looked
out of the window and saw the divine revellers singing up the street
and a stab of joy went through her heart.  Aslan stopped right under
the window and looked up at her.

"Oh, don't, don't," she said.  "I'd love to.  But I mustn't.  I must
stick to my work.  And the children would be frightened if they saw
you."

"Frightened?" said the most pig-like of the boys.  "Who's she talking
to out of the window?  Let's tell the inspector she talks to people out
of the window when she ought to be teaching us."

"Let's go and see who it is," said another boy, and they all came
crowding to the window.  But as soon as their mean little faces looked
out, Bacchus gave a great cry of _Euan, euoi-oi-oi-oi_ and the boys all
began howling with fright and trampling one another down to get out of
the door and jumping out of the windows.  And it was said afterwards
(whether truly or not) that those particular little boys were never
seen again, but that there were a lot of very fine little pigs in that
part of the country which had never been there before.

"Now, Dear Heart," said Aslan to the Mistress: and she jumped down and
joined them.

At Beaversdam they re-crossed the river and came east again along the
southern bank.  They came to a little cottage where a child stood in
the doorway crying.  "Why are you crying, my love?" asked Aslan.  The
child, who had never even seen a picture of a lion, was not afraid of
him.  "Auntie's very ill," she said.  "She's going to die."  Then Aslan
went to go in at the door of the cottage, but it was too small for him.
So, when he had got his head through, he pushed with his shoulders
(Lucy and Susan fell off when he did this) and lifted the whole house
up and it all fell backwards and apart.  And there, still in her bed,
though the bed was now in the open air, lay a little old woman who
looked as if she had Dwarf blood in her.  She was at death's door, but
when she opened her eyes and saw the bright, hairy head of the lion
staring into her face, she did not scream or faint.  She said, "Oh,
Aslan!  I knew it was true.  I've been waiting for this all my life.
Have you come to take me away?"

"Yes, dearest," said Aslan.  "But not the long journey yet."  And as he
spoke, like the flush creeping along the underside of a cloud at
sunrise, the colour came back to her white face and her eyes grew
bright and she sat up and said, "Why, I do declare I feel _that_
better.  I think I could take a little breakfast this morning."

"Here you are, mother," said Bacchus, dipping a pitcher in the cottage
well and handing it to her.  But what was in it now was not water but
the richest wine, red as red-currant jelly, smooth as oil, strong as
beef, warming as tea, cool as dew.

"Eh, you've done something to our well," said the old woman.  "That
makes a nice change, that does."  And she jumped out of bed.

"Ride on me," said Aslan, and added to Susan and Lucy, "You two queens
will have to run now."

"But we'd like that just as well," said Susan.  And off they went again.

And so at last, with leaping and dancing and singing, with music and
laughter and roaring and barking and neighing, they all came to the
place where Miraz's army stood flinging down their swords and holding
up their hands, and Peter's army, still holding their weapons and
breathing hard, stood round them with stern and glad faces.  And the
first thing that happened was that the old woman slipped off Aslan's
back and ran across to Caspian and they embraced one another; for she
was his old nurse.




_Chapter XV_

ASLAN MAKES A DOOR IN THE AIR

At the sight of Aslan the cheeks of the Telmarine soldiers became the
colour of cold gravy, their knees knocked together, and many fell on
their faces.  They had not believed in lions and this made their fear
greater.  Even the Red Dwarfs, who knew that he came as a friend, stood
with open mouths and could not speak.  Some of the Black Dwarfs, who
had been of Nikabrik's party, began to edge away.  But all the Talking
Beasts surged round the Lion, with purrs and grunts and squeaks and
whinneys of delight, fawning on him with their tails, rubbing against
him, touching him reverently with their noses and going to and fro
under his body and between his legs.  If you have ever seen a little
cat loving a big dog whom it knows and trusts, you will have a pretty
good picture of their behaviour.  Then Peter, leading Caspian, forced
his way through the crowd of animals.

"This is Caspian, Sir," he said.  And Caspian knelt and kissed the
Lion's paw.

"Welcome, Prince," said Aslan.  "Do you feel yourself sufficient to
take up the Kingship of Narnia?"

"I--I don't think I do, Sir," said Caspian.  "I'm only a kid."

"Good," said Aslan.  "If you had felt yourself sufficient, it would
have been a proof that you were not.  Therefore, under us and under the
High King, you shall be King of Narnia, Lord of Cair Paravel and
Emperor of the Lone Islands.  You and your heirs while your race lasts.
And your coronation--but what have we here?"  For at that moment a
curious little procession was approaching--eleven Mice, six of whom
carried between them something on a litter made of branches, but the
litter was no bigger than a large atlas.  No-one has ever seen mice
more woebegone than these.  They were plastered with mud--some with
blood too--and their ears were down and their whiskers drooped and
their tails dragged in the grass, and their leader piped on his slender
pipe a melancholy tune.  On the litter lay what seemed little better
than a damp heap of fur; all that was left of Reepicheep.  He was still
breathing, but more dead than alive, gashed with innumerable wounds,
one paw crushed, and, where his tail had been, a bandaged stump.

"Now, Lucy," said Aslan.

Lucy had her diamond bottle out in a moment.  Though only a drop was
needed on each of Reepicheep's wounds, the wounds were so many that
there was a long and anxious silence before she had finished and the
Master Mouse sprang from the litter.  His hand went at once to his
sword hilt, with the other he twirled his whiskers.  He bowed.

"Hail, Aslan!" came his shrill voice.  "I have the honour----" But then
he suddenly stopped.

The fact was that he still had no tail--whether that Lucy had forgotten
it or that her cordial, though it could heal wounds, could not make
things grow again.  Reepicheep became aware of his loss as he made his
bow; perhaps it altered something in his balance.  He looked over his
right shoulder.  Failing to see his tail, he strained his neck further
till he had to turn his shoulders and his whole body followed.  But by
that time his hind quarters had turned too and were out of sight.  Then
he strained his neck looking over his shoulder again, with the same
result.  Only after he had turned completely round three times did he
realise the dreadful truth.

"I am confounded," said Reepicheep to Aslan.  "I am completely out of
countenance.  I must crave your indulgence for appearing in this
unseemly fashion."

"It becomes you very well, Small One," said Aslan.

"All the same," replied Reepicheep, "if anything could be done ...
Perhaps her Majesty?" and here he bowed to Lucy.

"But what do you want with a tail?" asked Aslan.

"Sir," said the Mouse, "I can eat and sleep and die for my King without
one.  But a tail is the honour and glory of a Mouse."

"I have sometimes wondered, friend," said Aslan, "whether you do not
think too much about your honour."

"Highest of all High Kings," said Reepicheep, "permit me to remind you
that a very small size has been bestowed on us Mice, and if we did not
guard our dignity, some (who weigh worth by inches) would allow
themselves very unsuitable pleasantries at our expense.  That is why I
have been at some pains to make it known that no-one who does not wish
to feel this sword as near his heart as I can reach shall talk in my
presence about Traps or Toasted Cheese or Candles: no, Sir--not the
tallest fool in Narnia!"  Here he glared very fiercely up at
Wimbleweather, but the Giant, who was always a stage behind everyone
else, had not yet discovered what was being talked about down at his
feet, and so missed the point.

"Why have your followers all drawn _their_ swords, may I ask?" said
Aslan.

"May it please your High Majesty," said the second Mouse, whose name
was Peepiceek, "we are all waiting to cut off our own tails if our
Chief must go without his.  We will not bear the shame of wearing an
honour which is denied to the High Mouse."

"Ah!" roared Aslan.  "You have conquered me.  You have great hearts.
Not for the sake of your dignity, Reepicheep, but for the love that is
between you and your people, and still more for the kindness your
people showed me long ago when you ate away the cords that bound me on
the Stone Table (and it was then, though you have long forgotten it,
that you began to be _Talking_ Mice), you shall have your tail again."

Before Aslan had finished speaking the new tail was in its place.
Then, at Aslan's command, Peter bestowed the Knighthood of the Order of
the Lion on Caspian, and Caspian, as soon as he was knighted, himself
bestowed it on Trufflehunter and Trumpkin and Reepicheep, and made
Doctor Cornelius his Lord Chancellor, and confirmed the Bulgy Bear in
his hereditary office of Marshal of the Lists.  And there was great
applause.

After this the Telmarine soldiers, firmly but without taunts or blows,
were taken across the ford and all put under lock and key in the town
of Beruna and given beef and beer.  They made a great fuss about wading
the river, for they all hated and feared running water just as much as
they hated and feared woods and animals.  But in the end the nuisance
was over: and then the nicest part of that long day began.

Lucy, sitting close to Aslan and divinely comfortable, wondered what
the trees were doing.  At first she thought they were merely dancing;
they were certainly going round slowly in two circles, one from left to
right and the other from right to left.  Then she noticed that they
kept throwing something down in the centre of both circles.  Sometimes
she thought they were cutting off long strands of their hair; at other
times it looked as if they were breaking off bits of their
fingers--but, if so, they had plenty of fingers to spare and it did not
hurt them.  But whatever they were throwing down, when it reached the
ground, it became brushwood or dry sticks.  Then three or four of the
Red Dwarfs came forward with their tinder boxes and set light to the
pile, which first crackled, and then blazed, and finally roared as a
woodland bonfire on midsummer night ought to do.  And everyone sat down
in a wide circle around it.

Then Bacchus and Silenus and the Maenads began a dance, far wilder than
the dance of the trees; not merely a dance for fun and beauty (though
it was that too) but a magic dance of plenty, and where their hands
touched, and where their feet fell, the feast came into
existence--sides of roasted meat that filled the grove with delicious
smell, and wheaten cakes and oaten cakes, honey and many-coloured
sugars and cream as thick as porridge and as smooth as still water,
peaches, nectarines, pomegranates, pears, grapes, strawberries,
raspberries--pyramids and cataracts of fruit.  Then, in great wooden
cups and bowls and mazers, wreathed with ivy, came the wines; dark,
thick ones like syrups of mulberry juice, and clear red ones like red
jellies liquefied, and yellow wines and green wines and yellowy-green
and greenish-yellow.

But for the tree people different fare was provided.  When Lucy saw
Clodsley Shovel and his moles scuffling up the turf in various places
(which Bacchus had pointed out to them) and realised that the trees
were going to eat _earth_ it gave her rather a shudder.  But when she
saw the earths that were actually brought to them she felt quite
different.  They began with a rich brown loam that looked almost
exactly like chocolate; so like chocolate, in fact, that Edmund tried a
piece of it, but he did not find it at all nice.  When the rich loam
had taken the edge off their hunger, the trees turned to an earth of
the kind you see in Somerset, which is almost pink.  They said it was
lighter and sweeter.  At the cheese stage they had a chalky soil, and
then went on to delicate confections of the finest gravels powdered
with choice silver sand.  They drank very little wine, and it made the
Hollies very talkative: for the most part they quenched their thirst
with deep draughts of mingled dew and rain, flavoured with forest
flowers and the airy taste of the thinnest clouds.

Thus Aslan feasted the Narnians till long after the sunset had died
away, and the stars had come out; and the great fire, now hotter but
less noisy, shone like a beacon in the dark woods, and the frightened
Telmarines saw it from far away and wondered what it might mean.  The
best thing of all about this feast was that there was no breaking up or
going away, but as the talk grew quieter and slower, one after another
would begin to nod and finally drop off to sleep with feet towards the
fire and good friends on either side, till at last there was silence
all round the circle, and the chattering of water over stone at the
Fords of Beruna could be heard once more.  But all night Aslan and the
Moon gazed upon each other with joyful and unblinking eyes.

Next day messengers (who were chiefly squirrels and birds) were sent
all over the country with a proclamation to the scattered
Telmarines--including, of course, the prisoners in Beruna.  They were
told that Caspian was now King and that Narnia would henceforth belong
to the Talking Beasts and the Dwarfs and Dryads and Fauns and other
creatures quite as much as to the men.  Any who chose to stay under the
new conditions might do so; but for those who did not like the idea,
Aslan would provide another home.  Anyone who wished to go there must
come to Aslan and the Kings at the Fords of Beruna by noon on the fifth
day.  You may imagine that this caused plenty of head-scratching among
the Telmarines.  Some of them, chiefly the young ones, had, like
Caspian, heard stories of the Old Days and were delighted that they had
come back.  They were already making friends with the creatures.  These
all decided to stay in Narnia.  But most of the older men, especially
those who had been important under Miraz, were sulky and had no wish to
live in a country where they could not rule the roast.  "Live here with
a lot of blooming performing animals!  No fear," they said.  "And
ghosts too," some added with a shudder.  "That's what those there
Dryads really are.  It's not canny."  They were also suspicious.  "I
don't trust 'em," they said.  "Not with that awful Lion and all.  He
won't keep his claws off us long, _you'll_ see."  But then they were
equally suspicious of his offer to give them a new home.  "Take us off
to his den and eat us one by one most likely," they muttered.  And the
more they talked to one another the sulkier and more suspicious they
became.  But on the appointed day more than half of them turned up.

At one end of the glade Aslan had caused to be set up two stakes of
wood, higher than a man's head and about three feet apart.  A third,
and lighter, piece of wood was bound across them at the top uniting
them, so that the whole thing looked like a doorway from nowhere into
nowhere.  In front of this stood Aslan himself with Peter on his right
and Caspian on his left.  Grouped round them were Susan and Lucy,
Trumpkin and Trufflehunter, the Lord Cornelius, Glenstorm, Reepicheep
and others.  The children and the Dwarfs had made good use of the royal
wardrobes in what had been the castle of Miraz and was now the castle
of Caspian, and what with silk and cloth of gold, with snowy linen
glancing through slashed sleeves, with silver mail shirts and jewelled
sword-hilts, with gilt helmets and feathered bonnets, they were almost
too bright to look at.  Even the beasts wore rich chains about their
necks.  Yet nobody's eyes were on them or the children.  The living and
strokable gold of Aslan's mane outshone them all.  The rest of the Old
Narnians stood down each side of the glade.  At the far end stood the
Telmarines.  The sun shone brightly and pennants fluttered in the light
wind.

"Men of Telmar," said Aslan, "you who seek a new land, hear my words.
I will send you all to your own country, which I know and you do not."

"We don't remember Telmar.  We don't know where it is.  We don't know
what it is like," grumbled the Telmarines.

"You came into Narnia out of Telmar," said Aslan.  "But you came into
Telmar from another place.  You do not belong to this world at all.
You came hither, certain generations ago, out of that same world to
which the High King Peter belongs."

At this, half the Telmarines began whimpering, "There you are.  Told
you so.  He's going to kill us all, send us right out of the world,"
and the other half began throwing out their chests and slapping one
another on the back and whispering, "There you are.  Might have guessed
we didn't belong to this place with all its queer, nasty, unnatural
creatures.  We're of royal blood, you'll see."  And even Caspian and
Cornelius and the children turned to Aslan with looks of amazement on
their faces.

"Peace," said Aslan in the low voice which was nearest to his growl.
The earth seemed to shake a little and every living thing in the grove
became still as stone.

"You, Sir Caspian," said Aslan, "might have known that you could be no
true King of Narnia unless, like the Kings of old, you were a son of
Adam and came from the world of Adam's sons.  And so you are.  Many
years ago in that world, in a deep sea of that world which is called
the South Sea, a shipload of pirates were driven by storm on an island.
And there they did as pirates would: killed the natives and took the
native women for wives, and made palm wine, and drank and were drunk,
and lay in the shade of the palm trees, and woke up and quarrelled, and
sometimes killed one another.  And in one of these frays six were put
to flight by the rest and fled with their women into the centre of the
island and up a mountain, and went, as they thought, into a cave to
hide.  But it was one of the magical places of that world, one of the
chinks or chasms between that world and this.  There were many chinks
or chasms between worlds in old times, but they have grown rarer.  This
was one of the last: I do not say _the_ last.  And so they fell, or
rose, or blundered, or dropped right through, and found themselves in
this world, in the Land of Telmar which was then unpeopled.  But why it
was unpeopled is a long story: I will not tell it now.  And in Telmar
their descendants lived and became a fierce and proud people; and after
many generations there was a famine in Telmar and they invaded Narnia,
which was then in some disorder (but that also would be a long story),
and conquered it and ruled it.  Do you mark all this well, King
Caspian?"

"I do indeed, Sir," said Caspian.  "I was wishing that I came of a more
honourable lineage."

"You come of the Lord Adam and the Lady Eve," said Aslan.  "And that is
both honour enough to erect the head of the poorest beggar, and shame
enough to bow the shoulders of the greatest emperor on earth.  Be
content."

Caspian bowed.

"And now," said Aslan, "you men and women of Telmar, will you go back
to that island in the world of men from which your fathers first came?
It is no bad place.  The race of those pirates who first found it has
died out, and it is without inhabitants.  There are good wells of fresh
water, and fruitful soil, and timber for building, and fish in the
lagoons; and the other men of that world have not yet discovered it.
The chasm is open for your return; but this I must warn you, that once
you have gone through, it will close behind you for ever.  There will
be no more commerce between the worlds by that door."

There was silence for a moment.  Then a burly, decent-looking fellow
among the Telmarine soldiers pushed forward and said:

"Well, I'll take the offer."

"It is well chosen," said Aslan.  "And because you have spoken first,
strong magic is upon you.  Your future in that world shall be good.
Come forth."

The man, now a little pale, came forward.  Aslan and his court drew
aside, leaving him free access to the empty doorway of the stakes.

"Go through it, my son," said Aslan, bending towards him and touching
the man's nose with his own.  As soon as the Lion's breath came about
him, a new look came into the man's eyes--startled, but not unhappy--as
if he were trying to remember something.  Then he squared his shoulders
and walked into the Door.

Everyone's eyes were fixed on him.  They saw the three pieces of wood,
and through them the trees and grass and sky of Narnia.  They saw the
man between the doorposts: then, in one second, he had vanished utterly.

From the other end of the glade the remaining Telmarines set up a
wailing.  "Ugh!  What's happened to him?  Do you mean to murder us?  We
won't go that way."  And then one of the clever Telmarines said:

"We don't see any other world through those sticks.  If you want us to
believe in it, why doesn't one of _you_ go?  All your own friends are
keeping well away from the sticks."

Instantly Reepicheep stood forward and bowed.  "If _my_ example can be
of any service, Aslan," he said, "I will take eleven mice through that
arch at your bidding without a moment's delay."

"Nay, little one," said Aslan, laying his velvety paw ever so lightly
on Reepicheep's head.  "They would do dreadful things to you in that
world.  They would show you at fairs.  It is others who must lead."

"Come on," said Peter suddenly to Edmund and Lucy.  "Our time's up."

"What do you mean?" said Edmund.

"This way," said Susan, who seemed to know all about it.  "Back into
the trees.  We've got to change."

"Change what?" asked Lucy.

"Our clothes, of course," said Susan.  "Nice fools we'd look on the
platform of an English station in _these_."

"But our other things are at Caspian's castle," said Edmund.

"No, they're not," said Peter, still leading the way into the thickest
wood.  "They're all here.  They were brought down in bundles this
morning.  It's all arranged."

"Was that what Aslan was talking to you and Susan about this morning?"
asked Lucy.

"Yes--that and other things," said Peter, his face very solemn.  "I
can't tell it to you all.  There were things he wanted to say to Su and
me because we're not coming back to Narnia."

"Never?" cried Edmund and Lucy in dismay.

"Oh, you two are," answered Peter.  "At least, from what he said, I'm
pretty sure he means you to get back some day.  But not Su and me.  He
says we're getting too old."

"Oh, Peter," said Lucy.  "What awful bad luck.  Can you bear it?"

"Well, I think I can," said Peter.  "It's all rather different from
what I thought.  You'll understand when it comes to your last time.
But, quick, here are our things."

It was odd, and not very nice, to take off their royal clothes and to
come back in their school things (not very fresh now) into that great
assembly.  One or two of the nastier Telmarines jeered.  But the other
creatures all cheered and rose up in honour of Peter the High King, and
Queen Susan of the Horn, and King Edmund and Queen Lucy.  There were
affectionate and (on Lucy's part) tearful farewells with all their old
friends--animal kisses, and hugs from Bulgy Bears, and hands wrung by
Trumpkin, and a last tickly, whiskerish embrace with Trufflehunter.
And of course Caspian offered the Horn back to Susan and of course
Susan told him to keep it.  And then, wonderfully and terribly, it was
farewell to Aslan himself, and Peter took his place with Susan's hands
on his shoulders and Edmund's on hers and Lucy's on his and the first
of the Telmarine's on Lucy's, and so in a long line they moved forward
to the Door.  After that came a moment which is hard to describe, for
the children seemed to be seeing three things at once.  One was the
mouth of a cave opening into the glaring green and blue of an island in
the Pacific, where all the Telmarines would find themselves the moment
they were through the Door.  The second was a glade in Narnia, the
faces of Dwarfs and Beasts, the deep eyes of Aslan, and the white
patches on the Badger's cheeks.  But the third (which rapidly swallowed
up the other two) was the grey, gravelly surface of a platform in a
country station, and a seat with luggage round it, where they were all
sitting as if they had never moved from it--a little flat and dreary
for a moment after all they had been through, but also, unexpectedly,
nice in its own way, what with the familiar railway smell and the
English sky and the summer term before them.

"Well!" said Peter.  "We _have_ had a time."

"Bother!" said Edmund.  "I've left my new torch in Narnia."






[End of Prince Caspian, by C. S. Lewis]
