
* A Project Gutenberg Canada Ebook *

This ebook is made available at no cost and with very few
restrictions. These restrictions apply only if (1) you make
a change in the ebook (other than alteration for different
display devices), or (2) you are making commercial use of
the ebook. If either of these conditions applies, please
check gutenberg.ca/links/licence.html before proceeding.

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be
under copyright in some countries. If you live outside Canada,
check your country's copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER
COPYRIGHT IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT DOWNLOAD
OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

Title: The Horse and his Boy
Author: Lewis, C. S. [Clive Staples] (1898-1963)
Date of first publication: 1954
Edition used as base for this ebook:
  London: Geoffrey Bles, 1959
  [third printing]
Date first posted: 28 January 2014
Date last updated: 28 January 2014
Project Gutenberg Canada ebook #1153

This ebook was produced by Al Haines


[Transcriber's note: Because of copyright considerations,
the illustrations by Pauline Baynes (1922-2008) have been
omitted from this etext.]






  THE HORSE AND HIS BOY

  by
  C. S. LEWIS



  _WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY_
  PAULINE BAYNES



  LONDON
  GEOFFREY BLES




  © _C. S. Lewis 1954_

  _Printed in Great Britain by
  Butler & Tanner Ltd. Frome
  for Geoffrey Bles Ltd.
  52 Doughty Street London W.C.1_

  _First published 1954
  Reprinted 1956
  Reprinted 1959_




  TO
  DAVID & DOUGLAS GRESHAM




  CONTENTS


  I.  HOW SHASTA SET OUT ON HIS TRAVELS
  II.  A WAYSIDE ADVENTURE
  III.  AT THE GATES OF TASHBAAN
  IV.  SHASTA FALLS IN WITH THE NARNIANS
  V.  PRINCE CORIN
  VI.  SHASTA AMONG THE TOMBS
  VII.  ARAVIS IN TASHBAAN
  VIII.  IN THE HOUSE OF THE TISROC
  IX.  ACROSS THE DESERT
  X.  THE HERMIT OF THE SOUTHERN MARCH
  XI.  THE UNWELCOME FELLOW TRAVELLER
  XII.  SHASTA IN NARNIA
  XIII.  THE FIGHT AT ANVARD
  XIV.  HOW BREE BECAME A WISER HORSE
  XV.  RABADASH THE RIDICULOUS




_Chapter I_

HOW SHASTA SET OUT ON HIS TRAVELS

This is the story of an adventure that happened in Narnia and Calormen
and the lands between, in the Golden Age when Peter was High King in
Narnia and his brother and his two sisters were King and Queens under
him.

In those days, far south in Calormen on a little creek of the sea,
there lived a poor fisherman called Arsheesh, and with him there lived
a boy who called him Father.  The boy's name was Shasta.  On most days
Arsheesh went out in his boat to fish in the morning, and in the
afternoon he harnessed his donkey to a cart and loaded the cart with
fish and went a mile or so southward to the village to sell it.  If it
had sold well he would come home in a moderately good temper and say
nothing to Shasta, but if it had sold badly he would find fault with
him and perhaps beat him.  There was always something to find fault
with for Shasta had plenty of work to do, mending and washing the nets,
cooking the supper, and cleaning the cottage in which they both lived.

Shasta was not at all interested in anything that lay south of his home
because he had once or twice been to the village with Arsheesh and he
knew that there was nothing very interesting there.  In the village he
only met other men who were just like his father--men with long, dirty
robes, and wooden shoes turned up at the toe, and turbans on their
heads, and beards, talking to one another very slowly about things that
sounded dull.  But he was very interested in everything that lay to the
north because no-one ever went that way and he was never allowed to go
there himself.  When he was sitting out of doors mending the nets, and
all alone, he would often look eagerly to the north.  One could see
nothing but a grassy slope running up to a level ridge and beyond that
the sky with perhaps a few birds in it.

Sometimes if Arsheesh was there Shasta would say, "O my Father, what is
there beyond that hill?"  And then if the fisherman was in a bad temper
he would box Shasta's ears and tell him to attend to his work.  Or if
he was in a peaceable mood he would say, "O my son, do not allow your
mind to be distracted by idle questions.  For one of the poets has
said, 'Application to business is the root of prosperity, but those who
ask questions that do not concern them are steering the ship of folly
towards the rock of indigence.'"

Shasta thought that beyond the hill there must be some delightful
secret which his father wished to hide from him.  In reality, however,
the fisherman talked like this because he didn't know what lay to the
north.  Neither did he care.  He had a very practical mind.

One day there came from the south a stranger who was unlike any man
that Shasta had seen before.  He rode upon a strong dappled horse with
flowing mane and tail and his stirrups and bridle were inlaid with
silver.  The spike of a helmet projected from the middle of his silken
turban and he wore a shirt of chain mail.  By his side hung a curving
scimitar, a round shield studded with bosses of brass hung at his back,
and his right hand grasped a lance.  His face was dark, but this did
not surprise Shasta because all the people of Calormen are like that;
what did surprise him was the man's beard which was dyed crimson, and
curled and gleaming with scented oil.  But Arsheesh knew by the gold
ring on the stranger's bare arm that he was a Tarkaan or great lord,
and he bowed kneeling before him till his beard touched the earth and
made signs to Shasta to kneel also.

The stranger demanded hospitality for the night which of course the
fisherman dared not refuse.  All the best they had was set before the
Tarkaan for supper (and he didn't think much of it) and Shasta, as
always happened when the fisherman had company, was given a hunk of
bread and turned out of the cottage.  On these occasions he usually
slept with the donkey in its little thatched stable.  But it was much
too early to go to sleep yet, and Shasta, who had never learned that it
is wrong to listen behind doors, sat down with his ear to a crack in
the wooden wall of the cottage to hear what the grown-ups were talking
about.  And this is what he heard.

"And now, O my host," said the Tarkaan, "I have a mind to buy that boy
of yours."

"O my master," replied the fisherman (and Shasta knew by the wheedling
tone the greedy look that was probably coming into his face as he said
it), "what price could induce your servant, poor though he is, to sell
into slavery his only child and his own flesh?  Has not one of the
poets said, 'Natural affection is stronger than soup and offspring more
precious than carbuncles?'"

"It is even so," replied the guest drily.  "But another poet has
likewise said, 'He who attempts to deceive the judicious is already
baring his own back for the scourge.'  Do not load your aged mouth with
falsehoods.  This boy is manifestly no son of yours, for your cheek is
as dark as mine but the boy is fair and white like the accursed but
beautiful barbarians who inhabit the remote north."

"How well it was said," answered the fisherman, "that Swords can be
kept off with shields but the Eye of Wisdom pierces through every
defence!  Know then, O my formidable guest, that because of my extreme
poverty I have never married and have no child.  But in that same year
in which the Tisroc (may he live for ever) began his august and
beneficent reign, on a night when the moon was at her full, it pleased
the gods to deprive me of my sleep.  Therefore I arose from my bed in
this hovel and went forth to the beach to refresh myself with looking
upon the water and the moon and breathing the cool air.  And presently
I heard a noise as of oars coming to me across the water and then, as
it were, a weak cry.  And shortly after, the tide brought to the land a
little boat in which there was nothing but a man lean with extreme
hunger and thirst who seemed to have died but a few moments before (for
he was still warm), and an empty water skin, and a child, still living.
'Doubtless,' said I, 'these unfortunates have escaped from the wreck of
a great ship, but by the admirable designs of the gods, the elder has
starved himself to keep the child alive and has perished in sight of
land.'  Accordingly, remembering how the gods never fail to reward
those who befriend the destitute, and being moved by compassion (for
your servant is a man of tender heart)----"

"Leave out all these idle words in your own praise," interrupted the
Tarkaan.  "It is enough to know that you took the child--and have had
ten times the worth of his daily bread out of him in labour, as anyone
can see.  And now tell me at once what price you put on him, for I am
wearied with your loquacity."

"You yourself have wisely said," answered Arsheesh, "that the boy's
labour has been to me of inestimable value.  This must be taken into
account in fixing the price.  For if I sell the boy I must undoubtedly
either buy or hire another to do his work."

"I'll give you fifteen crescents for him," said the Tarkaan.

"Fifteen!" cried Arsheesh in a voice that was something between a whine
and a scream.  "Fifteen!  For the prop of my old age and the delight of
my eyes!  Do not mock my grey beard, Tarkaan though you be.  My price
is seventy."

At this point Shasta got up and tiptoed away.  He had heard all he
wanted, for he had often listened when men were bargaining in the
village and knew how it was done.  He was quite certain that Arsheesh
would sell him in the end for something much more than fifteen
crescents and much less than seventy, but that he and the Tarkaan would
take hours in getting to an agreement.

You must not imagine that Shasta felt at all as you and I would feel if
we had just overheard our parents talking about selling us for slaves.
For one thing, his life was already little better than slavery; for all
he knew, the lordly stranger on the great horse might be kinder to him
than Arsheesh.  For another, the story about his own discovery in the
boat had filled him with excitement and with a sense of relief.  He had
often been uneasy because, try as he might, he had never been able to
love the fisherman, and he knew that a boy ought to love his father.
And now, apparently, he was no relation to Arsheesh at all.  That took
a great weight off his mind.  "Why, I might be anyone!" he thought.  "I
might be the son of a Tarkaan myself--or the son of the Tisroc (may he
live for ever)--or of a god!"

He was standing out in the grassy place before the cottage while he
thought these things.  Twilight was coming on apace and a star or two
was already out, but the remains of the sunset could still be seen in
the west.  Not far away the stranger's horse, loosely tied to an iron
ring in the wall of the donkey's stable, was grazing.  Shasta strolled
over to it and patted its neck.  It went on tearing up the grass and
took no notice of him.

Then another thought came into Shasta's mind.  "I wonder what sort of a
man that Tarkaan is," he said out loud.  "It would be splendid if he
was kind.  Some of the slaves in a great lord's house have next to
nothing to do.  They wear lovely clothes and eat meat every day.
Perhaps he'd take me to the wars and I'd save his life in a battle and
then he'd set me free and adopt me as his son and give me a palace and
a chariot and a suit of armour.  But then he might be a horrid, cruel
man.  He might send me to work on the fields in chains.  I wish I knew.
How can I know?  I bet this horse knows, if only he could tell me."

The horse had lifted its head.  Shasta stroked its smooth-as-satin nose
and said, "I wish you could talk, old fellow."

And then for a second he thought he was dreaming, for quite distinctly,
though in a low voice, the Horse said, "But I can."

Shasta stared into its great eyes and his own grew almost as big, with
astonishment.

"How ever did _you_ learn to talk?" he asked.

"Hush!  Not so loud," replied the Horse.  "Where I come from, nearly
all the animals talk."

"Where ever is that?" asked Shasta.

"Narnia," answered the Horse.  "The happy land of Narnia--Narnia of the
heathery mountains and the thymy downs, Narnia of the many rivers, the
plashing glens, the mossy caverns and the deep forests ringing with the
hammers of the Dwarfs.  Oh the sweet air of Narnia!  An hour's life
there is better than a thousand years in Calormen."  It ended with a
whinny that sounded very like a sigh.

"How did you get here?" said Shasta.

"Kidnapped," said the Horse.  "Or stolen, or captured--whichever you
like to call it.  I was only a foal at the time.  My mother warned me
not to range the southern slopes, into Archenland and beyond, but I
wouldn't heed her.  And by the Lion's Mane I have paid for my folly.
All these years I have been a slave to humans, hiding my true nature
and pretending to be dumb and witless like _their_ horses."

"Why didn't you tell them who you were?"

"Not such a fool, that's why.  If they'd once found out I could talk
they would have made a show of me at fairs and guarded me more
carefully than ever.  My last chance of escape would have been gone."

"And why----" began Shasta, but the Horse interrupted him.

"Now look," it said, "we mustn't waste time on idle questions.  You
want to know about my master the Tarkaan Anradin.  Well, he's bad.  Not
too bad to me, for a war horse costs too much to be treated very badly.
But you'd better be lying dead to-night than go to be a human slave in
his house to-morrow."

"Then I'd better run away," said Shasta, turning very pale.

"Yes, you had," said the Horse.  "But why not run away with me?"

"Are you going to run away too?" said Shasta.

"Yes, if you'll come with me," answered the Horse.  "This is the chance
for both of us.  You see if I run away without a rider, everyone who
sees me will say 'Stray horse' and be after me as quick as he can.
With a rider I've a chance to get through.  That's where you can help
me.  On the other hand, you can't get very far on those two silly legs
of yours (what absurd legs humans have!) without being overtaken.  But
on me you can outdistance any other horse in this country.  That's
where I can help you.  By the way, I suppose you know how to ride?"

"Oh yes, of course," said Shasta.  "At least, I've ridden the donkey."

"Ridden the _what_?" retorted the Horse with extreme contempt.  (At
least, that is what he meant.  Actually it came out in a sort of
neigh--"Ridden the wha-ha-ha-ha-ha." Talking horses always become more
horsey in accent when they are angry.)

"In other words," it continued, "you _can't_ ride.  That's a drawback.
I'll have to teach you as we go along.  If you can't ride, can you
fall?"

"I suppose anyone can fall," said Shasta.

"I mean can you fall and get up again without crying and mount again
and fall again and yet not be afraid of falling?"

"I--I'll try," said Shasta.

"Poor little beast," said the Horse in a gentler tone.  "I forget
you're only a foal.  We'll make a fine rider of you in time.  And
now--we mustn't start until those two in the hut are asleep.  Meantime
we can make our plans.  My Tarkaan is on his way north to the great
city, to Tashbaan itself and the court of the Tisroc----"

"I say," put in Shasta in rather a shocked voice, "oughtn't you to say
May he live for ever?"

"Why?" asked the Horse.  "I'm a free Narnian.  And why should I talk
slaves' and fools' talk?  I don't want him to live for ever, and I know
that he's not going to live for ever whether I want him to or not.  And
I can see you're from the free north too.  No more of this southern
jargon between you and me!  And now, back to our plans.  As I said, my
human was on his way north to Tashbaan."

"Does that mean we'd better go to the south?"

"I think not," said the Horse.  "You see, he thinks I'm dumb and
witless like his other horses.  Now if I really were, the moment I got
loose I'd go back home to my stable and paddock; back to his palace
which is two days' journey south.  That's where he'll look for me.
He'd never dream of my going on north on my own.  And anyway he will
probably think that someone in the last village who saw him ride
through has followed us to here and stolen me."

"Oh hurrah!" said Shasta.  "Then we'll go north.  I've been longing to
go to the north all my life."

"Of course you have," said the Horse.  "That's because of the blood
that's in you.  I'm sure you're true northern stock.  But not too loud.
I should think they'd be asleep soon now."

"I'd better creep back and see," suggested Shasta.

"That's a good idea," said the Horse.  "But take care you're not
caught."

It was a good deal darker now and very silent except for the sound of
the waves on the beach, which Shasta hardly noticed because he had been
hearing it day and night as long as he could remember.  The cottage, as
he approached it, showed no light.  When he listened at the front there
was no noise.  When he went round to the only window, he could hear,
after a second or two, the familiar noise of the old fisherman's
squeaky snore.  It was funny to think that if all went well he would
never hear it again.  Holding his breath and feeling a little bit
sorry, but much less sorry than he was glad, Shasta glided away over
the grass and went to the donkey's stable, groped along to a place he
knew where the key was hidden, opened the door and found the Horse's
saddle and bridle which had been locked up there for the night.  He
bent forward and kissed the donkey's nose.  "I'm sorry we can't take
_you_," he said.

"There you are at last," said the Horse when he got back to it.  "I was
beginning to wonder what had become of you."

"I was getting your things out of the stable," replied Shasta.  "And
now, can you tell me how to put them on?"

For the next few minutes Shasta was at work, very cautiously to avoid
jingling, while the Horse said things like, "Get that girth a bit
tighter," or "You'll find a buckle lower down," or "You'll need to
shorten those stirrups a good bit."  When all was finished it said:

"Now; we've got to have reins for the look of the thing, but you won't
be using them.  Tie them to the saddle-bow: very slack so that I can do
what I like with my head.  And remember--you are not to touch them."

"What are they for, then?" asked Shasta.

"Ordinarily they are for directing me," replied the Horse.  "But as I
intend to do all the directing on this journey, you'll please keep your
hands to yourself.  And there's another thing.  I'm not going to have
you grabbing my mane."

"But, I say," pleaded Shasta.  "If I'm not to hold on by the reins or
by your mane, what am I to hold on by?"

"You hold on with your knees," said the Horse.  "That's the secret of
good riding.  Grip my body between your knees as hard as you like; sit
straight up, straight as a poker; keep your elbows in.  And by the way,
what did you do with the spurs?"

"Put them on my heels, of course," said Shasta.  "I do know that much."

"Then you can take them off and put them in the saddle-bag.  We may be
able to sell them when we get to Tashbaan.  Ready?  And now I think you
can get up."

"Ooh!  You're a dreadful height," gasped Shasta after his first, and
unsuccessful attempt.

"I'm a horse, that's all," was the reply.  "Anyone would think I was a
haystack from the way you're trying to climb up me!  There, that's
better.  Now sit _up_ and remember what I told you about your knees.
Funny to think of me who has led cavalry charges and won races having a
potato-sack like you in the saddle!  However, off we go."  It chuckled,
not unkindly.

And it certainly began their night journey with great caution.  First
of all it went just south of the fisherman's cottage to the little
river which there ran into the sea, and took care to leave in the mud
some very plain hoof-marks pointing south.  But as soon as they were in
the middle of the ford it turned upstream and waded till they were
about a hundred yards further inland than the cottage.  Then it
selected a nice gravelly bit of bank which would take no footprints and
came out on the northern side.  Then, still at a walking pace, it went
northward till the cottage, the one tree, the donkey's stable, and the
creek--everything, in fact, that Shasta had ever known--had sunk out of
sight in the grey summer-night darkness.  They had been going uphill
and now were at the top of the ridge--that ridge which had always been
the boundary of Shasta's known world.  He could not see what was ahead
except that it was all open and grassy.  It looked endless; wild and
lonely and free.

"I say!" observed the Horse.  "What a place for a gallop, eh?"

"Oh don't let's," said Shasta.  "Not yet.  I don't know how to--please,
Horse.  I don't know your name."

"Breehy-hinny-brinny-hoohy-hah," said the Horse.

"I'll never be able to say that," said Shasta.  "Can I call you Bree?"

"Well, if it's the best you can do, I suppose you must," said the
Horse.  "And what shall I call you?"

"I'm called Shasta."

"H'm," said Bree.  "Well now, there's a name that's _really_ hard to
pronounce.  But now about this gallop.  It's a good deal easier than
trotting if you only knew, because you don't have to rise and fall.
Grip with your knees and keep your eyes straight ahead between my ears.
Don't look at the ground.  If you think you're going to fall just grip
harder and sit up straighter.  Ready?  Now: for Narnia and the North."




_Chapter II_

A WAYSIDE ADVENTURE

It was nearly noon on the following day when Shasta was wakened by
something warm and soft moving over his face.  He opened his eyes and
found himself staring into the long face of a horse; its nose and lips
were almost touching his.  He remembered the exciting events of the
previous night and sat up.  But as he did so he groaned.

"Ow, Bree," he gasped.  "I'm so sore.  All over.  I can hardly move."

"Good morning, small one," said Bree.  "I was afraid you might feel a
bit stiff.  It can't be the falls.  You didn't have more than a dozen
or so, and it was all lovely, soft springy turf that must have been
almost a pleasure to fall on.  And the only one that might have been
nasty was broken by that gorse bush.  No: it's the riding itself that
comes hard at first.  What about breakfast?  I've had mine."

"Oh bother breakfast.  Bother everything," said Shasta.  "I tell you I
can't move."  But the horse nuzzled at him with its nose and pawed him
gently with a hoof till he had to get up.  And then he looked about him
and saw where they were.  Behind them lay a little copse.  Before them
the turf, dotted with white flowers sloped down to the brow of a cliff.
Far below them, so that the sound of the breaking waves was very faint,
lay the sea.  Shasta had never seen it from such a height and never
seen so much of it before, nor dreamed how many colours it had.  On
either hand the coast stretched away, headland after headland, and at
the points you could see the white foam running up the rocks but making
no noise because it was so far off.  There were gulls flying overhead
and the heat shivered on the ground; it was a blazing day.  But what
Shasta chiefly noticed was the air.  He couldn't think what was
missing, until at last he realised that there was no smell of fish in
it.  For of course, neither in the cottage nor among the nets, had he
ever been away from that smell in his life.  And this new air was so
delicious, and all his old life seemed so far away, that he forgot for
a moment about his bruises and his aching muscles and said:

"I say, Bree, didn't you say something about breakfast?"

"Yes, I did," answered Bree.  "I think you'll find something in the
saddle-bags.  They're over there on that tree where you hung them up
last night--or early this morning, rather."

They investigated the saddle-bags and the results were cheering--a meat
pasty, only slightly stale, a lump of dried figs and another lump of
green cheese, a little flask of wine, and some money; about forty
crescents in all, which was more than Shasta had ever seen.

While Shasta sat down--painfully and cautiously--with his back against
a tree and started on the pasty, Bree had a few more mouthfuls of grass
to keep him company.

"Won't it be stealing to use the money?" asked Shasta.

"Oh," said the Horse, looking up with its mouth full of grass, "I never
thought of that.  A free horse and a talking horse mustn't steal, of
course.  But I think it's all right.  We're prisoners and captives in
enemy country.  That money is booty, spoil.  Besides, how are we to get
any food for you without it?  I suppose, like all humans, you won't eat
natural food like grass and oats."

"I can't."

"Ever tried?"

"Yes, I have.  I can't get it down at all.  You couldn't either if you
were me."

"You're rum little creatures, you humans," remarked Bree.

When Shasta had finished his breakfast (which was by far the nicest he
had ever eaten) Bree said, "I think I'll have a nice roll before we put
on that saddle again."  And he proceeded to do so.  "That's good.
That's very good," he said, rubbing his back on the turf and waving all
four legs in the air.  "You ought to have one too, Shasta," he snorted.
"It's most refreshing."

But Shasta burst out laughing and said, "You do look funny when you're
on your back!"

"I look nothing of the sort," said Bree.  But then suddenly he rolled
round on his side, raised his head and looked hard at Shasta, blowing a
little.

"Does it really look funny?" he asked in an anxious voice.

"Yes, it does," replied Shasta.  "But what does it matter?"

"You don't think, do you," said Bree, "that it might be a thing
_talking_ horses never do?--a silly, clownish trick I've learned from
the dumb ones?  It would be dreadful to find, when I get back to
Narnia, that I've picked up a lot of low, bad habits.  What do you
think, Shasta?  Honestly, now.  Don't spare my feelings.  Should you
think the real, free horses--the talking kind--do roll?"

"How should I know?  Anyway I don't think I should bother about it if I
were you.  We've got to get there first.  Do you know the way?"

"I know my way to Tashbaan.  After that comes the desert.  Oh, we'll
manage the desert somehow, never fear.  Why, we'll be in sight of the
Northern mountains then.  Think of it!  To Narnia and the North!
Nothing will stop us then.  But I'd be glad to be past Tashbaan.  You
and I are safer away from cities."

"Can't we avoid it?"

"Not without going a long way inland, and that would take us into
cultivated land and main roads; and I wouldn't know the way.  No, we'll
just have to creep along the coast.  Up here on the downs we'll meet
nothing but sheep and rabbits and gulls and a few shepherds.  And by
the way, what about starting?"

Shasta's legs ached terribly as he saddled Bree and climbed into the
saddle, but the Horse was kindly to him and went at a soft pace all
afternoon.  When evening twilight came they dropped by steep tracks
into a valley and found a village.  Before they got into it Shasta
dismounted and entered it on foot to buy a loaf and some onions and
radishes.  The Horse trotted round by the fields in the dusk and met
Shasta at the far side.  This became their regular plan every second
night.

These were great days for Shasta, and every day better than the last as
his muscles hardened and he fell less often.  Even at the end of his
training Bree still said he sat like a bag of flour in the saddle.
"And even if it was safe, young 'un, I'd be ashamed to be seen with you
on the main road."  But in spite of his rude words Bree was a patient
teacher.  No one can teach riding so well as a horse.  Shasta learned
to trot, to canter, to jump, and to keep his seat even when Bree pulled
up suddenly or swung unexpectedly to the left or the right--which, as
Bree told him, was a thing you might have to do at any moment in a
battle.  And then of course Shasta begged to be told of the battles and
wars in which Bree had carried the Tarkaan.  And Bree would tell of
forced marches and the fording of swift rivers, of charges and of
fierce fights between cavalry and cavalry, when the war horses fought
as well as the men, being all fierce stallions, trained to bite and
kick, and to rear at the right moment so that the horse's weight as
well as the rider's would come down on an enemy's crest in the stroke
of sword or battleaxe.  But Bree did not want to talk about the wars as
often as Shasta wanted to hear about them.  "Don't speak of them,
youngster," he would say.  "They were only the Tisroc's wars and I
fought in them as a slave and a dumb beast.  Give me the Narnian wars
where I shall fight as a free Horse among my own people!  Those will be
wars worth talking about.  Narnia and the North!  Bra-ha-ha!  Broo Hoo!"

Shasta soon learned, when he heard Bree talking like that, to prepare
for a gallop.

After they had travelled on for weeks and weeks past more bays and
headlands and rivers and villages than Shasta could remember, there
came a moonlit night when they started their journey at evening, having
slept during the day.  They had left the downs behind them and were
crossing a wide plain with a forest about half a mile away on their
left.  The sea, hidden by low sand-hills, was about the same distance
on their right.  They had jogged along for about an hour, sometimes
trotting and sometimes walking, when Bree suddenly stopped.

"What's up?" said Shasta.

"S-s-ssh!" said Bree, craning his neck round and twitching his ears.
"Did you hear something?  Listen."

"It sounds like another horse--between us and the wood," said Shasta
after he had listened for about a minute.

"It _is_ another horse," said Bree.  "And that's what I don't like."

"Isn't it probably just a farmer riding home late?" said Shasta with a
yawn.

"Don't tell me!" said Bree.  "_That's_ not a farmer's riding.  Nor a
farmer's horse either.  Can't you tell by the sound?  That's quality,
that horse is.  And it's being ridden by a real horseman.  I tell you
what it is, Shasta.  There's a Tarkaan under the edge of that wood.
Not on his war horse--it's too light for that.  On a fine blood mare, I
should say."

"Well it's stopped now, whatever it is," said Shasta.

"You're right," said Bree.  "And why should he stop just when we do?
Shasta, my boy, I do believe there's someone shadowing us at last."

"What shall we do?" said Shasta in a lower whisper than before.  "Do
you think he can see us as well as hear us?"

"Not in this light so long as we stay quite still," answered Bree.
"But look!  There's a cloud coming up.  I'll wait till that gets over
the moon.  Then we'll get off to our right as quietly as we can, down
to the shore.  We can hide among the sandhills if the worst comes to
the worst."

They waited till the cloud covered the moon and then, first at a
walking pace and afterwards at a gentle trot, made for the shore.

The cloud was bigger and thicker than it had looked at first and soon
the night grew very dark.  Just as Shasta was saying to himself "We
must be nearly at those sandhills by now" his heart leaped into his
mouth because an appalling noise had suddenly risen up out of the
darkness ahead; a long snarling roar, melancholy and utterly savage.
Instantly Bree swerved round and began galloping inland again as fast
as he could gallop.

"What is it?" gasped Shasta.

"Lions!" said Bree, without checking his pace or turning his head.

After that there was nothing but sheer galloping for some time.  At
last they splashed across a wide, shallow stream and Bree came to a
stop on the far side.  Shasta noticed that he was trembling and
sweating all over.

"That water may have thrown the brute off our scent," panted Bree when
he had partly got his breath again.  "We can walk for a bit now."

As they walked Bree said, "Shasta, I'm ashamed of myself.  I'm just as
frightened as a common, dumb Calormene horse.  I am really.  I don't
feel like a Talking Horse at all.  I don't mind swords and lances and
arrows but I can't bear--those creatures.  I think I'll trot for a bit."

About a minute later, however, he broke into a gallop again, and no
wonder.  For the roar broke out again, this time on their left from the
direction of the forest.

"Two of them," moaned Bree.

When they had galloped for several minutes without any further noise
from the lions Shasta said, "I say!  That other horse is galloping
beside us now.  Only a stone's throw away."

"All the b-better," panted Bree.  "Tarkaan on it--will have a
sword--protect us all."

"But Bree!" said Shasta.  "We might just as well be killed by lions as
caught.  Or _I_ might.  They'll hang me for horse-stealing."  He was
feeling less frightened of lions than Bree because he had never met a
lion; Bree had.

Bree only snorted in answer but he did sheer away to his right.  Oddly
enough the other horse seemed also to be sheering away to the left, so
that in a few seconds the space between them had widened a good deal.
But as soon as it did so there came two more lions' roars, immediately
after one another, one on the right and the other on the left, and the
horses began drawing nearer together.  So, apparently, did the lions.
The roaring of the brutes on each side was horribly close and they
seemed to be keeping up with the galloping horses quite easily.  Then
the cloud rolled away.  The moonlight, astonishingly bright, showed up
everything almost as if it were broad day.  The two horses and the two
riders were galloping neck to neck and knee to knee just as if they
were in a race.  Indeed Bree said (afterwards) that a finer race had
never been seen in Calormen.

Shasta now gave himself up for lost and began to wonder whether lions
killed you quickly or played with you as a cat plays with a mouse and
how much it would hurt.  At the same time (one sometimes does this at
the most frightful moments) he noticed everything.  He saw that the
other rider was a very small, slender person, mail-clad (the moon shone
on the mail) and riding magnificently.  He had no beard.

Something flat and shining was spread out before them.  Before Shasta
had time even to guess what it was there was a great splash and he
found his mouth half full of salt water.  The shining thing had been a
long inlet of the sea.  Both horses were swimming and the water was up
to Shasta's knees.  There was an angry roaring behind them and looking
back Shasta saw a great, shaggy, and terrible shape crouched on the
water's edge; but only one.  "We must have shaken off the other lion,"
he thought.

The lion apparently did not think its prey worth a wetting; at any rate
it made no attempt to take the water in pursuit.  The two horses, side
by side, were now well out into the middle of the creek and the
opposite shore could be clearly seen.  The Tarkaan had not yet spoken a
word.  "But he will," thought Shasta.  "As soon as we have landed.
What am I to say?  I must begin thinking out a story."

Then, suddenly, two voices spoke at his side.

"Oh, I _am_ so tired," said the one.

"Hold your tongue, Hwin, and don't be a fool," said the other.

"I'm dreaming," thought Shasta.  "I could have sworn that other horse
spoke."

Soon the horses were no longer swimming but walking and soon with a
great sound of water running off their sides and tails and with a great
crunching of pebbles under eight hoofs, they came out on the further
beach of the inlet.  The Tarkaan, to Shasta's surprise, showed no wish
to ask questions.  He did not even look at Shasta but seemed anxious to
urge his horse straight on.  Bree, however, at once shouldered himself
in the other horse's way.

"Broo-hoo-hah!" he snorted.  "Steady there!  I _heard_ you, I did.
There's no good pretending, Ma'am.  _I_ heard you.  You're a Talking
Horse, a Narnian horse just like me."

"What's it got to do with you if she is?" said the strange rider
fiercely, laying hand on sword-hilt.  But the voice in which the words
were spoken had already told Shasta something.

"Why, it's only a girl!" he exclaimed.

"And what business is it of yours if I am _only_ a girl?" snapped the
stranger.  "You're only a boy: a rude, common little boy--a slave
probably, who's stolen his master's horse."

"That's all _you_ know," said Shasta.

"He's not a thief, little Tarkheena," said Bree.  "At least, if there's
been any stealing, you might just as well say I stole _him_.  And as
for its not being my business, you wouldn't expect me to pass a lady of
my own race in this strange country without speaking to her?  It's only
natural I should."

"I think it's very natural too," said the mare.

"I wish you'd held your tongue, Hwin," said the girl.  "Look at the
trouble you've got us into."

"I don't know about trouble," said Shasta.  "You can clear off as soon
as you like.  We shan't keep you."

"No, you shan't," said the girl.

"What quarrelsome creatures these humans are," said Bree to the mare.
"They're as bad as mules.  Let's try to talk a little sense.  I take
it, Ma'am, your story is the same as mine?  Captured in early
youth--years of slavery among the Calormenes?"

"Too true, sir," said the mare with a melancholy whinny.

"And now, perhaps--escape?"

"Tell him to mind his own business, Hwin," said the girl.

"No, I won't, Aravis," said the mare, putting her ears back.  "This is
my escape just as much as yours.  And I'm sure a noble war-horse like
this is not going to betray us.  We are trying to escape, to get to
Narnia."

"And so, of course, are we," said Bree.  "Of course you guessed that at
once.  A little boy in rags riding (or trying to ride) a war horse at
dead of night couldn't mean anything but an escape of some sort.  And,
if I may say so, a high-born Tarkheena riding alone at night--dressed
up in her brother's armour--and very anxious for everyone to mind their
own business and ask her no questions--well, if that's not fishy, call
me a cob!"

"All right then," said Aravis.  "You've guessed it.  Hwin and I are
running away.  We are trying to get to Narnia.  And now, what about it?"

"Why, in that case, what is to prevent us all going together?" said
Bree.  "I trust, Madam Hwin, you will accept such assistance and
protection as I may be able to give you on the journey?"

"Why do you keep on talking to my horse instead of to me?" asked the
girl.

"Excuse me, Tarkheena," said Bree (with just the slightest backward
tilt of his ears), "but that's Calormene talk.  We're free Narnians,
Hwin and I, and I suppose, if you're running away to Narnia, you want
to be one too.  In that case Hwin isn't _your_ horse any longer.  One
might just as well say you're _her_ human."

The girl opened her mouth to speak and then stopped.  Obviously she had
not quite seen it in that light before.

"Still," she said after a moment's pause, "I don't know that there's so
much point in all going together.  Aren't we more likely to be noticed?"

"Less," said Bree; and the mare said, "Oh do let's.  I should feel much
more comfortable.  We're not even certain of the way.  I'm sure a great
charger like this knows far more than we do."

"Oh come on, Bree," said Shasta, "and let them go their own way.  Can't
you see they don't want us?"

"We do," said Hwin.

"Look here," said the girl.  "I don't mind going with you, Mr.
War-Horse, but what about this boy?  How do I know he's not a spy?"

"Why don't you say at once that you think I'm not good enough for you?"
said Shasta.

"Be quiet, Shasta," said Bree.  "The Tarkheena's question is quite
reasonable.  I'll vouch for the boy, Tarkheena.  He's been true to me
and a good friend.  And he's certainly either a Narnian or an
Archenlander."

"All right, then.  Let's go together."  But she didn't say anything to
Shasta and it was obvious that she wanted Bree, not him.

"Splendid!" said Bree.  "And now that we've got the water between us
and those dreadful animals, what about you two humans taking off our
saddles and our all having a rest and hearing one another's stories."

Both the children unsaddled their horses and the horses had a little
grass and Aravis produced rather nice things to eat from her saddlebag.
But Shasta sulked and said No thanks, and that he wasn't hungry.  And
he tried to put on what he thought very grand and stiff manners, but as
a fisherman's hut is not usually a good place for learning grand
manners, the result was dreadful.  And he half knew that it wasn't a
success and then became sulkier and more awkward than ever.  Meanwhile
the two horses were getting on splendidly.  They remembered the very
same places in Narnia--"the grasslands up above Beaversdam" and found
that they were some sort of second cousins once removed.  This made
things more and more uncomfortable for the humans until at last Bree
said, "And now, Tarkheena, tell us your story.  And don't hurry it--I'm
feeling comfortable now."

Aravis immediately began, sitting quite still and using a rather
different tone and style from her usual one.  For in Calormen,
story-telling (whether the stories are true or made up) is a thing
you're taught, just as English boys and girls are taught essay-writing.
The difference is that people want to hear the stories, whereas I never
heard of anyone who wanted to read the essays.




_Chapter III_

AT THE GATES OF TASHBAAN

"My name," said the girl at once, "is Aravis Tarkheena and I am the
only daughter of Kidrash Tarkaan, the son of Rishti Tarkaan, the son of
Kidrash Tarkaan, the son of Ilsombreh Tisroc, the son of Ardeeb Tisroc
who was descended in a right line from the god Tash.  My father is lord
of the province of Calavar and is one who has the right of standing on
his feet in his shoes before the face of the Tisroc himself (may he
live for ever).  My mother (on whom be the peace of the gods) is dead
and my father has married another wife.  One of my brothers has fallen
in battle against the rebels in the far west and the other is a child.
Now it came to pass that my father's wife, my stepmother, hated me and
the sun appeared dark in her eyes as long as I lived in my father's
house.  And so she persuaded my father to promise me in marriage to
Ahoshta Tarkaan.  Now this Ahoshta is of base birth, though in these
latter years he has won the favour of the Tisroc (may he live for ever)
by flattery and evil counsels, and is now made a Tarkaan and lord of
many cities and is likely to be chosen as the Grand Vizier when the
present Grand Vizier dies.  Moreover he is at least sixty years old and
has a hump on his back and his face resembles that of an ape.
Nevertheless my father, because of the wealth and power of this
Ahoshta, and being persuaded by his wife, sent messengers offering me
in marriage, and the offer was favourably accepted and Ahoshta sent
word that he would marry me this very year at the time of high summer.

"When this news was brought to me the sun appeared dark in my eyes and
I laid myself on my bed and wept for a day.  But on the second day I
rose up and washed my face and caused my mare Hwin to be saddled and
took with me a sharp dagger which my brother had carried in the western
wars and rode out alone.  And when my father's house was out of sight
and I was come to a green open place in a certain wood where there were
no dwellings of men, I dismounted from Hwin my mare and took out the
dagger.  Then I parted my clothes where I thought the readiest way lay
to my heart and I prayed to all the gods that as soon as I was dead I
might find myself with my brother.  After that I shut my eyes and my
teeth and prepared to drive the dagger into my heart.  But before I had
done so, this mare spoke with the voice of one of the daughters of men
and said, 'O my mistress, do not by any means destroy yourself, for if
you live you may yet have good fortune but all the dead are dead
alike.'"

"I didn't say it half so well as that," muttered the mare.

"Hush, Ma'am, hush," said Bree, who was thoroughly enjoying the story.
"She's telling it in the grand Calormene manner and no story-teller in
a Tisroc's court could do it better.  Pray go on, Tarkheena."

"When I heard the language of men uttered by my mare," continued
Aravis, "I said to myself, the fear of death has disordered my reason
and subjected me to delusions.  And I became full of shame for none of
my lineage ought to fear death more than the biting of a gnat.
Therefore I addressed myself a second time to the stabbing, but Hwin
came near to me and put her head in between me and the dagger and
discoursed to me most excellent reasons and rebuked me as a mother
rebukes her daughter.  And now my wonder was so great that I forgot
about killing myself and about Ahoshta and said, 'O my mare, how have
you learned to speak like one of the daughters of men?'  And Hwin told
me what is known to all this company, that in Narnia there are beasts
that talk, and how she herself was stolen from thence when she was a
little foal.  She told me also of the woods and waters of Narnia and
the castles and the great ships, till I said, 'In the name of Tash and
Azaroth and Zardeenah Lady of the Night, I have a great wish to be in
that country of Narnia.'  'O my mistress,' answered the mare, 'if you
were in Narnia you would be happy, for in that land no maiden is forced
to marry against her will.'

"And when we had talked together for a great time hope returned to me
and I rejoiced that I had not killed myself.  Moreover it was agreed
between Hwin and me that we should steal ourselves away together and we
planned it in this fashion.  We returned to my father's house and I put
on my gayest clothes and sang and danced before my father and pretended
to for delighted with the marriage which he had prepared be me.  Also I
said to him, 'O my father and O the delight of my eyes, give me your
licence and permission to go with one of my maidens alone for three
days into the woods to do secret sacrifices to Zardeenah, Lady of the
Night and of Maidens, as is proper and customary for damsels when they
must bid farewell to the service of Zardeenah and prepare themselves
for marriage.'  And he answered, 'O my daughter and O the delight of my
eyes, so shall it be.'

"But when I came out from the presence of my father I went immediately
to the oldest of his slaves, his secretary, who had dandled me on his
knees when I was a baby and loved me more than the air and the light.
And I swore him to be secret and begged him to write a certain letter
for me.  And he wept and implored me to change my resolution but in the
end he said, 'To hear is to obey,' and did all my will.  And I sealed
the letter and hid it in my bosom."

"But what was in the letter?" asked Shasta.

"Be quiet, youngster," said Bree.  "You're spoiling the story.  She'll
tell us all about the letter in the right place.  Go on, Tarkheena."

"Then I called the maid who was to go with me to the woods and perform
the rites of Zardeenah and told her to wake me very early in the
morning.  And I became merry with her and gave her wine to drink; but I
had mixed such things in her cup that I knew she must sleep for a night
and a day.  As soon as the household of my father had committed
themselves to sleep I arose and put on an armour of my brother's which
I always kept in my chamber in his memory.  I put into my girdle all
the money I had and certain choice jewels and provided myself also with
food, and saddled the mare with my own hands and rode away in the
second watch of the night.  I directed my course not to the woods where
my father supposed that I would go but north and east to Tashbaan.

"Now for three days and more I knew that my father would not seek me,
being deceived by the words I had said to him.  And on the fourth day
we arrived at the city of Azim Balda.  Now Azim Balda stands at the
meeting of many roads and from it the posts of the Tisroc (may he live
for ever) ride on swift horses to every part of the empire: and it is
one of the rights and privileges of the greater Tarkaans to send
messages by them.  I therefore went to the Chief of the Messengers in
the House of Imperial Posts in Azim Balda and said, 'O dispatcher of
messages, here is a letter from my uncle Ahoshta Tarkaan to Kidrash
Tarkaan lord of Calavar.  Take now these five crescents and cause it to
be sent to him.'  And the Chief of the Messengers said, 'To hear is to
obey.'

"This letter was feigned to be written by Ahoshta and this was the
signification of the writing: 'Ahoshta Tarkaan to Kidrash Tarkaan,
salutation and peace.  In the name of Tash the irresistible, the
inexorable.  Be it known to you that as I made my journey towards your
house to perform the contract of marriage between me and your daughter
Aravis Tarkheena, it pleased fortune and the gods that I fell in with
her in the forest when she had ended the rites and sacrifices of
Zardeenah according to the custom of maidens.  And when I learned who
she was, being delighted with her beauty and discretion, I became
inflamed with love and it appeared to me that the sun would be dark to
me if I did not marry her at once.  Accordingly I prepared the
necessary sacrifices and married your daughter the same hour that I met
her and have returned with her to my own house.  And we both pray and
charge you to come hither as speedily as you may that we may be
delighted with your face and speech; and also that you may bring with
you the dowry of my wife, which, by reason of my great charges and
expenses, I require without delay.  And because thou and I are as
brothers I assure myself that you will not be angered by the haste of
my marriage which is wholly occasioned by the great love I bear your
daughter.  And I commit you to the care of all the gods.'

"As soon as I had done this I rode on in all haste from Azim Balda,
fearing no pursuit and expecting that my father, having received such a
letter, would send messages to Ahoshta or go to him himself, and that
before the matter was discovered I should be beyond Tashbaan.  And that
is the pith of my story until this very night when I was chased by
lions and met you at the swimming of the salt water."

"And what happened to the girl--the one you drugged?" asked Shasta.

"Doubtless she was beaten for sleeping late," said Aravis coolly.  "But
she was a tool and spy of my stepmother's.  I am very glad they should
beat her."

"I say, that was hardly fair," said Shasta.

"I did not do any of these things for the sake of pleasing _you_," said
Aravis.

"And there's another thing I don't understand about that story," said
Shasta.  "You're not grown up, I don't believe you're any older than I
am.  I don't believe you're as old.  How could you be getting married
at your age?"

Aravis said nothing, but Bree at once said, "Shasta, don't display your
ignorance.  They're always married at that age in the great Tarkaan
families."

Shasta turned very red (though it was hardly light enough for the
others to see this) and felt snubbed.  Aravis asked Bree for his story.
Bree told it, and Shasta thought that he put in a great deal more than
he needed about the falls and the bad riding.  Bree obviously thought
it very funny, but Aravis did not laugh.  When Bree had finished they
all went to sleep.

Next day all four of them, two horses and two humans, continued their
journey together.  Shasta thought it had been much pleasanter when he
and Bree were on their own.  For now it was Bree and Aravis who did
nearly all the talking.  Bree had lived a long time in Calormen and had
always been among Tarkaans and Tarkaans' horses, and so of course he
knew a great many of the same people and places that Aravis knew.  She
would always be saying things like "But if you were at the fight of
Zulindreh you would have seen my cousin Alimash," and Bree would
answer, "Oh, yes, Alimash, he was only captain of the chariots, you
know.  I don't quite hold with chariots or the kind of horses who draw
chariots.  That's not real cavalry.  But he is a worthy nobleman.  He
filled my nosebag with sugar after the taking of Teebeth."  Or else
Bree would say, "I was down at the lake of Mezreel that summer," and
Aravis would say, "Oh, Mezreel!  I had a friend there, Lasaraleen
Tarkheena.  What a delightful place it is.  Those gardens, and the
Valley of the Thousand Perfumes!"  Bree was not in the least trying to
leave Shasta out of things, though Shasta sometimes nearly thought he
was.  People who know a lot of the same things can hardly help talking
about them, and if you're there you can hardly help feeling that you're
out of it.

Hwin the mare was rather shy before a great war-horse like Bree and
said very little.  And Aravis never spoke to Shasta at all if she could
help it.

Soon, however, they had more important things to think of.  They were
getting near Tashbaan.  There were more, and larger, villages, and more
people on the roads.  They now did nearly all their travelling by night
and hid as best they could during the day.  And at every halt they
argued and argued about what they were to do when they reached
Tashbaan.  Everyone had been putting off this difficulty, but now it
could be put off no longer.  During these discussions Aravis became a
little, a very little, less unfriendly to Shasta; one usually gets on
better with people when one is making plans than when one is talking
about nothing in particular.

Bree said the first thing now to do was to fix a place where they would
all promise to meet on the far side of Tashbaan even if, by any ill
luck, they got separated in passing the city.  He said the best place
would be the Tombs of the Ancient Kings on the very edge of the desert.
"Things like great stone bee-hives," he said, "you can't possibly miss
them.  And the best of it is that none of the Calormenes will go near
them because they think the place is haunted by ghouls and are afraid
of it."  Aravis asked if it wasn't really haunted by ghouls.  But Bree
said he was a free Narnian horse and didn't believe in these Calormene
tales.  And then Shasta said he wasn't a Calormene either and didn't
care a straw about these old stories of ghouls.  This wasn't quite
true.  But it rather impressed Aravis (though at the moment it annoyed
her too) and of course she said she didn't mind any number of ghouls
either.  So it was settled that the Tombs should be their assembly
place on the other side of Tashbaan, and everyone felt they were
getting on very well till Hwin humbly pointed out that the real problem
was not where they should go when they had got through Tashbaan but how
they were to get through it.

"We'll settle that to-morrow, Ma'am," said Bree.  "Time for a little
sleep now."

But it wasn't easy to settle.  Aravis's first suggestion was that they
should swim across the river below the city during the night and not go
into Tashbaan at all.  But Bree had two reasons against this.  One was
that the river-mouth was very wide and it would be far too long a swim
for Hwin to do, especially with a rider on her back.  (He thought it
would be too long for himself too, but he said much less about that.)
The other was that it would be full of shipping and of course anyone on
the deck of a ship who saw two horses swimming past would be almost
certain to be inquisitive.

Shasta thought they should go up the river above Tashbaan and cross it
where it was narrower.  But Bree explained that there were gardens and
pleasure houses on both banks of the river for miles and that there
would be Tarkaans and Tarkheenas living in them and riding about the
roads and having water parties on the river.  In fact it would be the
most likely place in the world for meeting someone who would recognise
Aravis or even himself.

"We'll have to have a disguise," said Shasta.

Hwin said it looked to her as if the safest thing was to go right
through the city itself from gate to gate because one was less likely
to be noticed in the crowd.  But she approved of the idea of disguise
as well.  She said, "Both the humans will have to dress in rags and
look like peasants or slaves.  And all Aravis's armour and our saddles
and things must be made into bundles and put on our backs, and the
children must pretend to drive us and people will think we're only
pack-horses."

"My dear Hwin!" said Aravis rather scornfully.  "As if anyone could
mistake Bree for anything but a war-horse however you disguised him!"

"I should think not, indeed," said Bree, snorting and letting his ears
go ever so little back.

"I know it's not a very good plan," said Hwin.  "But I think it's our
only chance.  And we haven't been groomed for ages and we're not
looking quite ourselves (at least, I'm sure I'm not).  I do think if we
get well plastered with mud and go along with our heads down as if
we're tired and lazy--and don't lift our hooves hardly at all--we might
not be noticed.  And our tails ought to be cut shorter: not neatly, you
know, but all ragged."

"My dear Madam," said Bree.  "Have you pictured to yourself how very
disagreeable it would be to arrive in Narnia in _that_ condition?"

"Well," said Hwin humbly (she was a very sensible mare), "the main
thing is to get there."

Though nobody much liked it, it was Hwin's plan which had to be adopted
in the end.  It was a troublesome one and involved a certain amount of
what Shasta called stealing, and Bree called "raiding".  One farm lost
a few sacks that evening and another lost a coil of rope the next: but
some tattered old boy's clothes for Aravis to wear had to be fairly
bought and paid for in a village.  Shasta returned with them in triumph
just as evening was closing in.  The others were waiting for him among
the trees at the foot of a low range of wooded hills which lay right
across their path.  Everyone was feeling excited because this was the
last hill; when they reached the ridge at the top they would be looking
down on Tashbaan.  "I do wish we were safely past it," muttered Shasta
to Hwin.  "Oh I do, I do," said Hwin fervently.

That night they wound their way through the woods up to the ridge by a
wood-cutter's track.  And when they came out of the woods at the top
they could see thousands of lights in the valley down below them.
Shasta had had no notion of what a great city would be like and it
frightened him.  They had their supper and the children got some sleep.
But the horses woke them very early in the morning.

The stars were still out and the grass was terribly cold and wet, but
daybreak was just beginning, far to their right across the sea.  Aravis
went a few steps away into the wood and came back looking odd in her
new, ragged clothes and carrying her real ones in a bundle.  These, and
her armour and shield and scimitar and the two saddles and the rest of
the horses' fine furnishings were put into the sacks.  Bree and Hwin
had already got themselves as dirty and bedraggled as they could and it
only remained to shorten their tails.  As the only tool for doing this
was Aravis's scimitar, one of the packs had to be undone again in order
to get it out.  It was a longish job and rather hurt the horses.

"My word!" said Bree, "if I wasn't a Talking Horse what a lovely kick
in the face I could give you!  I thought you were going to cut it, not
pull it out.  That's what it feels like."

But in spite of semi-darkness and cold fingers all was done in the end,
the big packs bound on the horses, the rope halters (which they were
now wearing instead of bridles and reins) in the children's hands, and
the journey began.

"Remember," said Bree.  "Keep together if we possibly can.  If not,
meet at the Tombs of the Ancient Kings, and whoever gets there first
must wait for the others."

"And remember," said Shasta.  "Don't you two horses forget yourselves
and start _talking_, whatever happens."




_Chapter IV_

SHASTA FALLS IN WITH THE NARNIANS

At first Shasta could see nothing in the valley below him but a sea of
mist with a few domes and pinnacles rising from it; but as the light
increased and the mist cleared away he saw more and more.  A broad
river divided itself into two streams and on the island between them
stood the city of Tashbaan, one of the wonders of the world.  Round the
very edge of the island, so that the water lapped against the stone,
ran high walls strengthened with so many towers that he soon gave up
trying to count them.  Inside the walls the island rose in a hill and
every bit of that hill, up to the Tisroc's palace and the great temple
of Tash at the top, was completely covered with buildings--terrace
above terrace, street above street, zigzag roads or huge flights of
steps bordered with orange trees and lemon trees, roof-gardens,
balconies, deep archways, pillared colonnades, spires, battlements,
minarets, pinnacles.  And when at last the sun rose out of the sea and
the great silver-plated dome of the temple flashed back its light, he
was almost dazzled.

"Get on, Shasta," Bree kept saying.

The river banks on each side of the valley were such a mass of gardens
that they looked at first like forest, until you got closer and saw the
white walls of innumerable houses peeping out from beneath the trees.
Soon after that, Shasta noticed a delicious smell of flowers and fruit.
About fifteen minutes later they were down among them, plodding on a
level road with white walls on each side and trees bending over the
walls.

"I say," said Shasta in an awed voice.  "This is a wonderful place!"

"I daresay," said Bree.  "But I wish we were safely through it and out
at the other side.  Narnia and the north!"

At that moment a low, throbbing noise began which gradually swelled
louder and louder till the whole valley seemed to be swaying with it.
It was a musical noise, but so strong and solemn as to be a little
frightening.

"That's the horns blowing for the city gates to be open," said Bree.
"We shall be there in a minute.  Now, Aravis, do droop your shoulders a
bit and step heavier and try to look less like a princess.  Try to
imagine you've been kicked and cuffed and called names all your life."

"If it comes to that," said Aravis, "what about you drooping your head
a bit more and arching your neck a bit less and trying to look less
like a war-horse?"

"Hush," said Bree.  "Here we are."

And they were.  They had come to the river's edge and the road ahead of
them ran along a many-arched bridge.  The water danced brightly in the
early sunlight; away to their right nearer the river's mouth, they
caught a glimpse of ships' masts.  Several other travellers were before
them on the bridge, mostly peasants driving laden donkeys and mules or
carrying baskets on their heads.  The children and the horses joined
the crowd.

"Is anything wrong?" whispered Shasta to Aravis, who had an odd look on
her face.

"Oh it's all very well for _you_," whispered Aravis rather savagely.
"What do _you_ care about Tashbaan?  But I ought to be riding in on a
litter with soldiers before me and slaves behind, and perhaps going to
a great feast in the Tisroc's palace (may he live for ever)--not
sneaking in like this.  It's different for you."

Shasta thought all this very silly.

At the far end of the bridge the walls of the city towered high above
them and the brazen gates stood open in the gateway which was really
wide but looked narrow because it was so very high.  Half a dozen
soldiers, leaning on their spears, stood on each side.  Aravis couldn't
help thinking, "They'd all jump to attention and salute me if they knew
whose daughter I am."  But the others were only thinking of how they'd
get through and hoping the soldiers would not ask any questions.
Fortunately they did not.  But one of them picked a carrot out of a
peasants' basket and threw it at Shasta with a rough laugh, saying:

"Hey!  Horse-boy!  You'll catch it if your master finds you've been
using his saddle-horse for pack work."

This frightened him badly for of course it showed that no one who knew
anything about horses would mistake Bree for anything but a charger.

"It's my master's orders, so there!" said Shasta.  But it would have
been better if he had held his tongue for the soldier gave him a box on
the side of his face that nearly knocked him down and said, "Take that,
you young filth, to teach you how to talk to freemen."  But they all
slunk into the city without being stopped.  Shasta cried only a very
little; he was used to hard knocks.

Inside the gates Tashbaan did not at first seem so splendid as it had
looked from a distance.  The first street was narrow and there were
hardly any windows in the walls on each side.  It was much more crowded
than Shasta had expected: crowded partly by the peasants (on their way
to market) who had come in with them, but also with water-sellers,
sweetmeat sellers, porters, soldiers, beggars, ragged children, hens,
stray dogs, and bare-footed slaves.  What you would chiefly have
noticed if you had been there was the smells, which came from unwashed
people, unwashed dogs, scent, garlic, onions, and the piles of refuse
which lay everywhere.

Shasta was pretending to lead but it was really Bree, who knew the way
and kept guiding him by little nudges with his nose.  They soon turned
to the left and began going up a steep hill.  It was much fresher and
pleasanter, for the road was bordered by trees and there were houses
only on the right side; on the other they looked out over the roofs of
houses in the lower town and could see some way up the river.  Then
they went round a hairpin bend to their right and continued rising.
They were zigzagging up to the centre of Tashbaan.  Soon they came to
finer streets.  Great statues of the gods and heroes of Calormen--who
are mostly impressive rather than agreeable to look at--rose on shining
pedestals.  Palm trees and pillared arcades cast shadows over the
burning pavements.  And through the arched gateways of many a palace
Shasta caught sight of green branches, cool fountains, and smooth
lawns.  It must be nice inside, he thought.

At every turn Shasta hoped they were getting out of the crowd, but they
never did.  This made their progress very slow, and every now and then
they had to stop altogether.  This usually happened because a loud
voice shouted out "Way, way way, for the Tarkaan", or "for the
Tarkheena", or "for the fifteenth Vizier", or "for the Ambassador", and
everyone in the crowd would crush back against the walls; and above
their heads Shasta would sometimes see the great lord or lady for whom
all the fuss was being made, lolling upon a litter which four or even
six gigantic slaves carried on their bare shoulders.  For in Tashbaan
there is only one traffic regulation, which is that everyone who is
less important has to get out of the way for everyone who is more
important; unless you want a cut from a whip or a punch from the butt
end of a spear.

It was in a splendid street very near the top of the city (the Tisroc's
palace was the only thing above it) that the most disastrous of these
stoppages occurred.

"Way!  Way!  Way!" came the voice.  "Way for the White Barbarian King,
the guest of the Tisroc (may he live for ever)!  Way for the Narnian
lords."

Shasta tried to get out of the way and to make Bree go back.  But no
horse, not even a talking horse from Narnia, backs easily.  And a woman
with a very edgy basket in her hands, who was just behind Shasta,
pushed the basket hard against his shoulders, and said, "Now then!  Who
are you shoving!"  And then someone else jostled him from the side and
in the confusion of the moment he lost hold of Bree.  And then the
whole crowd behind him became so stiffened and packed tight that he
couldn't move at all.  So he found himself, unintentionally, in the
first row and had a fine sight of the party that was coming down the
street.

It was quite unlike any other party they had seen that day.  The crier
who went before it shouting "Way, way!" was the only Calormene in it.
And there was no litter; everyone was on foot.  There were about half a
dozen men and Shasta had never seen anyone like them before.  For one
thing, they were all as fair-skinned as himself, and most of them had
fair hair.  And they were not dressed like men of Calormen.  Most of
them had legs bare to the knee.  Their tunics were of fine, bright,
hardy colours--woodland green, or gay yellow, or fresh blue.  Instead
of turbans they wore steel or silver caps, some of them set with
jewels, and one with little wings on each side of it.  A few were
bare-headed.  The swords at their sides were long and straight, not
curved like Calormene scimitars.  And instead of being grave and
mysterious like most Calormenes, they walked with a swing and let their
arms and shoulders go free, and chatted and laughed.  One was
whistling.  You could see that they were ready to be friends with
anyone who was friendly and didn't give a fig for anyone who wasn't.
Shasta thought he had never seen anything so lovely in his life.

But there was no time to enjoy it for at once a really dreadful thing
happened.  The leader of the fair-headed men suddenly pointed at
Shasta, cried out, "There he is!  There's our runaway!" and seized him
by the shoulder.  Next moment he gave Shasta a smack--not a cruel one
to make you cry but a sharp one to let you know you are in
disgrace--and added, shaking him:

"Shame on you, my lord!  Fie for shame!  Queen Susan's eyes are red
with weeping because of you.  What!  Truant for a whole night!  Where
have you been?"

Shasta would have darted under Bree's body and tried to make himself
scarce in the crowd if he had had the least chance; but the fair-haired
men were all round him by now and he was held firm.

Of course his first impulse was to say that he was only poor Arsheesh
the fisherman's son and that the foreign lord must have mistaken him
for someone else.  But then, the very last thing he wanted to do in
that crowded place was to start explaining who he was and what he was
doing.  If he started on that, he would soon be asked where he had got
his horse from, and who Aravis was--and then, good-bye to any chance of
getting through Tashbaan.  His next impulse was to look at Bree for
help.  But Bree had no intention of letting all that crowd know that he
could talk, and stood looking just as stupid as a horse can.  As for
Aravis, Shasta did not even dare to look at her for fear of drawing
attention.  And there was no time to think, for the leader of the
Narnians said at once:

"Take one of his little lordship's hands, Peridan, of your courtesy and
I'll take the other.  And now, on.  Our royal sister's mind will be
greatly eased when she sees our young scapegrace safe in our lodging."

And so, before they were half-way through Tashbaan, all their plans
were ruined, and without even a chance to say good-bye to the others
Shasta found himself being marched off among strangers and quite unable
to guess what might be going to happen next.  The Narnian King--for
Shasta began to see by the way the rest spoke to him that he must be a
king--kept on asking him questions; where he had been, how he had got
out, what he had done with his clothes, and didn't he know that he had
been very naughty.  Only the king called it "naught" instead of naughty.

And Shasta said nothing in answer, because he couldn't think of
anything to say that would not be dangerous.

"What!  All mum?" asked the king.  "I must plainly tell you, prince,
that this hangdog silence becomes one of your blood even less than the
scape itself.  To run away might pass for a boy's frolic with some
spirit in it.  But the king's son of Archenland should avouch his deed:
not hang his head like a Calormene slave."

This was very unpleasant, for Shasta felt all the time that this young
king was the very nicest kind of grown-up and would have liked to make
a good impression on him.

The strangers led him--held tightly by both hands--along a narrow
street and down a flight of shallow stairs and then up another to a
wide doorway in a white wall with two tall, dark cypress trees, one on
each side of it.  Once through the arch, Shasta found himself in a
courtyard which was also a garden.  A marble basin of clear water in
the centre was kept continually rippling by the fountain that fell into
it.  Orange trees grew round it out of smooth grass, and the four white
walls which surrounded the lawn were covered with climbing roses.  The
noise and dust and crowding of the streets seemed suddenly far away.
He was led rapidly across the garden and then into a dark doorway.  The
crier remained outside.  After that they took him along a corridor,
where the stone floor felt beautifully cool to his hot feet, and up
some stairs.  A moment later he found himself blinking in the light of
a big, airy room with wide open windows, all looking north so that no
sun came in.  There was a carpet on the floor more wonderfully coloured
than anything he had ever seen and his feet sank down into it as if he
were treading in thick moss.  All round the walls there were low sofas
with rich cushions on them, and the room seemed to be full of people;
very queer people some of them, thought Shasta.  But he had no time to
think of that before the most beautiful lady he had ever seen rose from
her place and threw her arms round him and kissed him, saying:

"Oh Corin, Corin, how could you?  And thou and I such close friends
ever since thy mother died.  And what should I have said to thy royal
father if I came home without thee?  Would have been a cause almost of
war between Archenland and Narnia which are friends time out of mind.
It was naught, playmate, very naught of thee to use us so."

"Apparently," thought Shasta to himself, "I'm being mistaken for a
prince of Archenland, wherever that is.  And these must be the
Narnians.  I wonder where the real Corin is?"  But these thoughts did
not help him to say anything out loud.

"Where hast been, Corin?" said the lady, her hands still on Shasta's
shoulders.

"I--I don't know," stammered Shasta.

"There it is, Susan," said the King.  "I could get no tale out of him,
true or false."

"Your Majesties!  Queen Susan!  King Edmund!" said a voice: and when
Shasta turned to look at the speaker he nearly jumped out of his skin
with surprise.  For this was one of those queer people whom he had
noticed out of the corner of his eye when he first came into the room.
He was about the same height as Shasta himself.  From the waist upwards
he was like a man, but his legs were hairy like a goat's, and shaped
like a goat's and he had goat's hooves and a tail.  His skin was rather
red and he had curly hair and a short pointed beard and two little
horns.  He was in fact a Faun, which is a creature Shasta had never
seen a picture of or even heard of.  And if you've read a book called
_The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe_ you may like to know that this
was the very same Faun, Tumnus by name, whom Queen Susan's sister Lucy
had met on the very first day when she found her way into Narnia.  But
he was a good deal older now for by this time Peter and Susan and
Edmund and Lucy had been Kings and Queens of Narnia for several years.

"Your Majesties," he was saying, "His little Highness has had a touch
of the sun.  Look at him!  He is dazed.  He does not know where he is."

Then of course everyone stopped scolding Shasta and asking him
questions and he was made much of and laid on a sofa and cushions were
put under his head and he was given iced sherbet in a golden cup to
drink and told to keep very quiet.

Nothing like this had ever happened to Shasta in his life before.  He
had never even imagined lying on anything so comfortable as that sofa
or drinking anything so delicious as that sherbet.  He was still
wondering what had happened to the others and how on earth he was going
to escape and meet them at the Tombs, and what would happen when the
real Corin turned up again.  But none of these worries seemed so
pressing now that he was comfortable.  And perhaps, later on, there
would be nice things to eat!

Meanwhile the people in that cool, airy room were very interesting.
Besides the Faun there were two Dwarfs (a kind of creature he had never
seen before) and a very large Raven.  The rest were all humans;
grown-ups, but young, and all of them, both men and women, had nicer
faces and voices than most Calormenes.  And soon Shasta found himself
taking an interest in the conversation.

"Now, Madam," the King was saying to Queen Susan (the lady who had
kissed Shasta).  "What think you?  We have been in this city fully
three weeks.  Have you yet settled in your mind whether you will marry
this dark-faced lover of yours, this Prince Rabadash, or no?"

The lady shook her head.  "No, brother," she said, "not for all the
jewels in Tashbaan."  ("Hullo!" thought Shasta.  "Although they're king
and queen, they're brother and sister, not married to one another.")

"Truly, sister," said the King, "I should have loved you the less if
you had taken him.  And I tell you that at the first coming of the
Tisroc's ambassadors into Narnia to treat of this marriage, and later
when the Prince was our guest at Cair Paravel, it was a wonder to me
that ever you could find it in your heart to show him so much favour."

"That was my folly, Edmund," said Queen Susan, "of which I cry you
mercy.  Yet when he was with us in Narnia, truly this Prince bore
himself in another fashion than he does now in Tashbaan.  For I take
you all to witness what marvellous feats he did in that great
tournament and hastilude which our brother the High King made for him,
and how meekly and courteously he consorted with us the space of seven
days.  But here, in his own city, he has shown another face."

"Ah!" croaked the Raven.  "It is an old saying: see the bear in his own
den before you judge of his conditions."

"That's very true, Sallowpad," said one of the Dwarfs.  "And another
is, Come, live with me and you'll know me."

"Yes," said the King.  "We have now seen him for what he is: that is, a
most proud, bloody, luxurious, cruel and self-pleasing tyrant."

"Then in the name of Aslan," said Susan, "let us leave Tashbaan this
very day."

"There's the rub, sister," said Edmund.  "For now I must open to you
all that has been growing in my mind these last two days and more.
Peridan, of your courtesy look to the door and see that there is no spy
upon us.  All well?  So.  For now we must be secret."

Everyone had begun to look very serious.  Queen Susan jumped up and ran
to her brother.  "Oh, Edmund," she cried.  "What is it?  There is
something dreadful in your face."




_Chapter V_

PRINCE CORIN

"My dear sister and very good Lady," said King Edmund, "you must now
show your courage.  For I tell you plainly we are in no small danger."

"What is it, Edmund?" asked the Queen.

"It is this," said Edmund.  "I do not think we shall find it easy to
leave Tashbaan.  While the Prince had hope that you would take him, we
were honoured guests.  But by the Lion's Mane, I think that as soon as
he has your flat denial we shall be no better than prisoners."

One of the Dwarfs gave a low whistle.

"I warned your Majesties, I warned you," said Sallowpad the Raven.
"Easily in but not easily out, as the lobster said in the lobster pot!"

"I have been with the Prince this morning," continued Edmund.  "He is
little used (more's the pity) to having his will crossed.  And he is
very chafed at your long delays and doubtful answers.  This morning he
pressed very hard to know your mind.  I put it aside--meaning at the
same time to diminish his hopes--with some light common jests about
women's fancies, and hinted that his suit was likely to be cold.  He
grew angry and dangerous.  There was a sort of threatening, though
still veiled under a show of courtesy, in every word he spoke."

"Yes," said Tumnus.  "And when I supped with the Grand Vizier last
night, it was the same.  He asked me how I liked Tashbaan.  And I (for
I could not tell him I hated every stone of it and I would not lie)
told him that now, when high summer was coming on, my heart turned to
the cool woods and dewy slopes of Narnia.  He gave a smile that meant
no good and said, 'There is nothing to hinder you from dancing there
again, little goatfoot; _always provided you leave us in exchange a
bride for our prince_.'"

"Do you mean he would make me his wife by force?" exclaimed Susan.

"That's my fear, Susan," said Edmund.  "Wife: or slave, which is worse."

"But how can he?  Does the Tisroc think our brother the High King would
suffer such an outrage?"

"Sire," said Peridan to the King.  "They would not be so mad.  Do they
think there are no swords and spears in Narnia?"

"Alas," said Edmund.  "My guess is that the Tisroc has very small fear
of Narnia.  We are a little land.  And little lands on the borders of a
great empire were always hateful to the lords of the great empire.  He
longs to blot them out, gobble them up.  When first he suffered the
Prince to come to Cair Paravel as your lover, sister, it may be that he
was only seeking an occasion against us.  Most likely he hopes to make
one mouthful of Narnia and Archenland both."

"Let him try," said the second Dwarf.  "At sea we are as big as he is.
And if he assaults us by land, he has the desert to cross."

"True, friend," said Edmund.  "But is the desert a sure defence?  What
does Sallowpad say?"

"I know that desert well," said the Raven.  "For I have flown above it
far and wide in my younger days" (you may be sure that Shasta pricked
up his ears at this point).  "And this is certain; that if the Tisroc
goes by the great oasis he can never lead a great army across it into
Archenland.  For though they could reach the oasis by the end of their
first day's march, yet the springs there would be too little for the
thirst of all those soldiers and their beasts.  But there is another
way."

Shasta listened more attentively still.

"He that would find that way," said the Raven, "must start from the
Tombs of the Ancient Kings and ride north-west so that the double peak
of Mount Pire is always straight ahead of him.  And so, in a day's
riding or a little more, he shall come to the head of a stony valley,
which is so narrow that a man might be within a furlong of it a
thousand times and never know that it was there.  And looking down this
valley he will see neither grass nor water nor anything else good.  But
if he rides on down it he will come to a river and can ride by that
water all the way into Archenland."

"And do the Calormenes know of this western way?" asked the Queen.

"Friends, friends," said Edmund, "what is the use of all this
discourse?  We are not asking whether Narnia or Calormen would win if
war arose between them.  We are asking how to save the honour of the
Queen and our own lives out of this devilish city.  For though my
brother, Peter the High King, defeated the Tisroc a dozen times over,
yet long before that day our throats would be cut and the Queen's grace
would be the wife, or more likely, the slave, of this prince."

"We have our weapons, King," said the first Dwarf.  "And this is a
reasonably defensible house."

"As to that," said the King, "I do not doubt that every one of us would
sell our lives dearly in the gate and they would not come at the Queen
but over our dead bodies.  Yet we should be merely rats fighting in a
trap when all's said."

"Very true," croaked the Raven.  "These last stands in a house make
good stories, but nothing ever came of them.  After their first few
repulses the enemy always set the house on fire."

"I am the cause of all this," said Susan, bursting into tears.  "Oh, if
only I had never left Cair Paravel.  Our last happy day was before
those ambassadors came from Calormen.  The Moles were planting an
orchard for us ... oh ... oh."  And she buried her face in her hands
and sobbed.

"Courage, Su, courage," said Edmund.  "Remember--but what is the matter
with you, Master Tumnus?"  For the Faun was holding both his horns with
his hands as if he were trying to keep his head on by them and writhing
to and fro as if he had a pain in his inside.

"Don't speak to me, don't speak to me," said Tumnus.  "I'm thinking.
I'm thinking so that I can hardly breathe.  Wait, wait, do wait."

There was a moment's puzzled silence and then the Faun looked up, drew
a long breath, mopped its forehead and said:

"The only difficulty is how to get down to our ship--with some stores,
too--without being seen and stopped."

"Yes," said a Dwarf drily.  "Just as the beggar's only difficulty about
riding is that he has no horse."

"Wait, wait," said Mr. Tumnus impatiently.  "All we need is some
pretext for going down to our ship to-day and taking stuff on board."

"Yes," said King Edmund doubtfully.

"Well, then," said the Faun, "how would it be if your Majesties bade
the Prince to a great banquet to be held on board our own galleon, the
_Splendour Hyaline_, to-morrow night?  And let the message be worded as
graciously as the Queen can contrive without pledging her honour: so as
to give the Prince a hope that she is weakening."

"This is very good counsel, Sire," croaked the Raven.

"And then," continued Tumnus excitedly, "everyone will expect us to be
going down to the ship all day, making preparations for our guests.
And let some of us go to the bazaars and spend every minim we have at
the fruiterers and the sweetmeat sellers and the wine merchants, just
as we would if we were really giving a feast.  And let us order
magicians and jugglers and dancing girls and flute players, all to be
on board to-morrow night."

"I see, I see," said King Edmund, rubbing his hands.

"And then," said Tumnus, "we'll all be on board to-night.  And as soon
as it is quite dark----"

"Up sails and out oars--!" said the King.

"And so to sea," cried Tumnus, leaping up and beginning to dance.

"And our nose northward," said the first Dwarf.

"Running for home!  Hurrah for Narnia and the North!" said the other.

"And the Prince waking next morning and finding his birds flown!" said
Peridan, clapping his hands.

"Oh Master Tumnus, dear Master Tumnus," said the Queen, catching his
hands and swinging with him as he danced.  "You have saved us all."

"The Prince will chase us," said another lord, whose name Shasta had
not heard.

"That's the least of my fears," said Edmund.  "I have seen all the
shipping in the river and there's no tall ship of war nor swift galley
there.  I wish he may chase us!  For the _Splendour Hyaline_ could sink
anything he has to send after her--if we were overtaken at all."

"Sire," said the Raven.  "You shall hear no better plot than the Faun's
though we sat in council for seven days.  And now, as we birds say,
nests before eggs.  Which is as much as to say, let us all take our
food and then at once be about our business."

Everyone arose at this and the doors were opened and the lords and the
creatures stood aside for the King and Queen to go out first.  Shasta
wondered what he ought to do, but Mr. Tumnus said, "Lie there, your
Highness, and I will bring you up a little feast to yourself in a few
moments.  There is no need for you to move until we are all ready to
embark."  Shasta laid his head down again on the pillows and soon he
was alone in the room.

"This is perfectly dreadful," thought Shasta.  It never came into his
head to tell these Narnians the whole truth and ask for their help.
Having been brought up by a hard, close-fisted man like Arsheesh, he
had a fixed habit of never telling grown-ups anything if he could help
it: he thought they would always spoil or stop whatever you were trying
to do.  And he thought that even if the Narnian King might be friendly
to the two horses, because they were Talking Beasts of Narnia, he would
hate Aravis, because she was a Calormene, and either sell her for a
slave or send her back to her father.  As for himself, "I simply
daren't tell them I'm not Prince Corin _now_," thought Shasta.  "I've
heard all their plans.  If they knew I wasn't one of themselves, they'd
never let me out of this house alive.  They'd be afraid I'd betray them
to the Tisroc.  They'd kill me.  And if the real Corin turns up, it'll
all come out, and they _will_!"  He had, you see, no idea of how noble
and free-born people behave.

"What am I to do?  What am I to do?" he kept saying to himself.
"What--hullo, here comes that goaty little creature again."

The Faun trotted in, half dancing, with a tray in its hands which was
nearly as large as itself.  This he set on an inlaid table beside
Shasta's sofa, and sat down himself on the carpeted floor with his
goaty legs crossed.

"Now, princeling," he said.  "Make a good dinner.  It will be your last
meal in Tashbaan."

It was a fine meal after the Calormene fashion.  I don't know whether
you would have liked it or not, but Shasta did.  There were lobsters,
and salad, and snipe stuffed with almonds and truffles, and a
complicated dish made of chicken-livers and rice and raisins and nuts,
and there were cool melons and gooseberry fools and mulberry fools, and
every kind of nice thing that can be made with ice.  There was also a
little flagon of the sort of wine that is called "white" though it is
really yellow.

While Shasta was eating, the good little Faun, who thought he was still
dazed with sunstroke, kept talking to him about the fine times he would
have when they all got home; about his good old father King Lune of
Archenland and the little castle where he lived on the southern slopes
of the pass.  "And don't forget," said Mr. Tumnus, "that you are
promised your first suit of armour and your first war horse on your
next birthday.  And then your Highness will begin to learn how to tilt
and joust.  And in a few years, if all goes well, King Peter has
promised your royal father that he himself will make you Knight at Cair
Paravel.  And in the meantime there will be plenty of comings and
goings between Narnia and Archenland across the neck of the mountains.
And of course you remember you have promised to come for a whole week
to stay with me for the Summer Festival, and there'll be bonfires and
all-night dances of Fauns and Dryads in the heart of the woods and, who
knows?--we might see Aslan himself!"

When the meal was over the Faun told Shasta to stay quietly where he
was.  "And it wouldn't do you any harm to have a little sleep," he
added.  "I'll call you in plenty of time to get on board.  And then,
Home.  Narnia and the North!"

Shasta had so enjoyed his dinner and all the things Tumnus had been
telling him that when he was left alone his thoughts took a different
turn.  He only hoped now that the real Prince Corin would not turn up
until it was too late and that he would be taken away to Narnia by
ship.  I am afraid he did not think at all of what might happen to the
real Corin when he was left behind in Tashbaan.  He was a little
worried about Aravis and Bree waiting for him at the Tombs.  But then
he said to himself, "Well, how can I help it?" and, "Anyway, that
Aravis thinks she's too good to go about with me, so she can jolly well
go alone," and at the same time he couldn't help feeling that it would
be much nicer going to Narnia by sea than toiling across the desert.

When he had thought all this he did what I expect you would have done
if you had been up very early and had a long walk and a great deal of
excitement and then a very good meal, and were lying on a sofa in a
cool room with no noise in it except when a bee came buzzing in through
the wide open windows.  He fell asleep.

What woke him was a loud crash.  He jumped up off the sofa, staring.
He saw at once from the mere look of the room--the lights and shadows
all looked different--that he must have slept for several hours.  He
saw also what had made the crash: a costly porcelain vase which had
been standing on the window-sill lay on the floor broken into about
thirty pieces.  But he hardly noticed all these things.  What he did
notice was two hands gripping the window-sill from outside.  They
gripped harder and harder (getting white at the knuckles) and then up
came a head and a pair of shoulders.  A moment later there was a boy of
Shasta's own age sitting astride of the sill with one leg hanging down
inside the room.

Shasta had never seen his own face in a looking-glass.  Even if he had,
he might not have realised that the other boy was (at ordinary times)
almost exactly like himself.  At the moment this boy was not
particularly like anyone for he had the finest black eye you ever saw,
and a tooth missing, and his clothes (which must have been splendid
ones when he put them on) were torn and dirty, and there was both blood
and mud on his face.

"Who are you?" said the boy in a whisper.

"Are you Prince Corin?" said Shasta.

"Yes, of course," said the other.  "But who are you?"

"I'm nobody, nobody in particular, I mean," said Shasta.  "King Edmund
caught me in the street and mistook me for you.  I suppose we must look
like one another.  Can I get out the way you've got in?"

"Yes, if you're any good at climbing," said Corin.  "But why are you in
such a hurry?  I say: we ought to be able to get some fun out of this
being mistaken for one another."

"No, no," said Shasta.  "We must change places at once.  It'll be
simply frightful if Mr. Tumnus comes back and finds us both here.  I've
had to pretend to be you.  And you're starting to-night--secretly.  And
where were you all this time?"

"A boy in the street made a beastly joke about Queen Susan," said
Prince Corin, "so I knocked him down.  He ran howling into a house and
his big brother came out.  So I knocked the big brother down.  Then
they all followed me until we ran into three old men with spears who
are called the Watch.  So I fought with the Watch and they knocked me
down.  It was getting dark by now.  Then the Watch took me along to
lock me up somewhere.  So I asked them if they'd like a stoup of wine
and they said they didn't mind if they did.  Then I took them to a wine
shop and got them some and they all sat down and drank till they fell
asleep.  I thought it was time for me to be off so I came out quietly
and then I found the first boy--the one who had started all the
trouble--still hanging about.  So I knocked him down again.  After that
I climbed up a pipe on to the roof of a house and lay quiet till it
began to get light this morning.  Ever since that I've been finding my
way back.  I say, is there anything to drink?"

"No, I drank it," said Shasta.  "And now, show me how you got in.
There's not a minute to lose.  You'd better lie down on the sofa and
pretend--but I forgot.  It'll be no good with all those bruises and
black eye.  You'll just have to tell them the truth, once I'm safely
away."

"What else did you think I'd be telling them?" asked the Prince with a
rather angry look.  "And who are _you_?"

"There's no time," said Shasta in a frantic whisper.  "I'm a Narnian, I
believe; something northern anyway.  But I've been brought up all my
life in Calormen.  And I'm escaping: across the desert; with a talking
Horse called Bree.  And now, quick!  How do I get away?"

"Look," said Corin.  "Drop from this window on to the roof of the
verandah.  But you must do it lightly, on your toes, or someone will
hear you.  Then along to your left and you can get up to the top of
that wall if you're any good at all as a climber.  Then along the wall
to the corner.  Drop onto the rubbish heap you will find outside, and
there you are."

"Thanks," said Shasta, who was already sitting on the sill.  The two
boys were looking into each other's faces and suddenly found that they
were friends.

"Good-bye," said Corin.  "And _good_ luck.  I do hope you get safe
away."

"Good-bye," said Shasta.  "I say, you have been having some adventures!"

"Nothing to yours," said the Prince.  "Now drop; lightly----I say," he
added as Shasta dropped, "I hope we meet in Archenland.  Go to my
father King Lune and tell him you're a friend of mine.  Look out!  I
hear someone coming."




_Chapter VI_

SHASTA AMONG THE TOMBS

Shasta ran lightly along the roof on tiptoes.  It felt hot to his bare
feet.  He was only a few seconds scrambling up the wall at the far end
and when he got to the corner he found himself looking down into a
narrow, smelly street, and there was a rubbish heap against the outside
of the wall just as Corin had told him.  Before jumping down he took a
rapid glance round him to get his bearings.  Apparently he had now come
over the crown of the island-hill on which Tashbaan is built.
Everything sloped away before him, flat roofs below flat roofs, down to
the towers and battlements of the city's northern wall.  Beyond that
was the river and beyond the river a short slope covered with gardens.
But beyond that again there was something he had never seen the like
of--a great yellowish-grey thing, flat as a calm sea, and stretching
for miles.  On the far side of it were huge blue things, lumpy but with
jagged edges, and some of them with white tops.  "The desert! the
mountains!" thought Shasta.

He jumped down onto the rubbish and began trotting along downhill as
fast as he could in the narrow lane, which soon brought him into a
wider street where there were more people.  No-one bothered to look at
a little ragged boy running along on bare feet.  Still, he was anxious
and uneasy till he turned a corner and there saw the city gate in front
of him.  Here he was pressed and jostled a bit, for a good many other
people were also going out; and on the bridge beyond the gate the crowd
became quite a slow procession, more like a queue than a crowd.  Out
there, with clear running water on each side, it was deliciously fresh
after the smell and heat and noise of Tashbaan.

When once Shasta had reached the far end of the bridge he found the
crowd melting away; everyone seemed to be going either to the left or
right along the river bank.  He went straight ahead up a road that did
not appear to be much used, between gardens.  In a few paces he was
alone, and a few more brought him to the top of the slope.  There he
stood and stared.  It was like coming to the end of the world for all
the grass stopped quite suddenly a few feet before him and the sand
began: endless level sand like on a sea shore but a bit rougher because
it was never wet.  The mountains, which now looked further off than
before, loomed ahead.  Greatly to his relief he saw, about five
minutes' walk away on his left, what must certainly be the Tombs, just
as Bree had described them; great masses of mouldering stone shaped
like gigantic bee-hives, but a little narrower.  They looked very black
and grim, for the sun was now setting right behind them.

He turned his face West and trotted towards the tombs.  He could not
help looking out very hard for any sign of his friends, though the
setting sun shone in his face so that he could see hardly anything.
"And anyway," he thought, "of course they'll be round on the far side
of the farthest Tomb, not this side where anyone might see them from
the city."

There were about twelve Tombs, each with a low arched doorway that
opened into absolute blackness.  They were dotted about in no kind of
order, so that it took a long time, going round this one and going
round that one, before you could be sure that you had looked round
every side of every tomb.  This was what Shasta had to do.  There was
nobody there.

It was very quiet here out on the edge of the desert; and now the sun
had really set.

Suddenly from somewhere behind him there came a terrible sound.
Shasta's heart gave a great jump and he had to bite his tongue to keep
himself from screaming.  Next moment he realised what it was: the horns
of Tashbaan blowing for the closing of the gates.  "Don't be a silly
little coward," said Shasta to himself.  "Why, it's only the same noise
you heard this morning."  But there is a great difference between a
noise heard letting you in with your friends in the morning, and a
noise heard alone at nightfall, shutting you out.  And now that the
gates were shut he knew there was no chance of the others joining him
that evening.  "Either they're shut up in Tashbaan for the night,"
thought Shasta, "or else they've gone on without me.  It's just the
sort of thing that Aravis would do.  But Bree wouldn't.  Oh, he
wouldn't--now, would he?"

In this idea about Aravis Shasta was once more quite wrong.  She was
proud and could be hard enough but she was as true as steel and would
never have deserted a companion, whether she liked him or not.

Now that Shasta knew he would have to spend the night alone (it was
getting darker every minute) he began to like the look of the place
less and less.  There was something very uncomfortable about those
great, silent shapes of stone.  He had been trying his hardest for a
long time not to think of ghouls: but he couldn't keep it up any longer.

"Ow!  Ow!  Help!" he shouted suddenly, for at that very moment he felt
something touch his leg.  I don't think anyone can be blamed for
shouting if something comes up from behind and touches him; not in such
a place and at such a time, when he is frightened already.  Shasta at
any rate was too frightened to run.  Anything would be better than
being chased round and round the burial places of the Ancient Kings
with something he dared not look at behind him.  Instead, he did what
was really the most sensible thing he could do.  He looked round; and
his heart almost burst with relief.  What had touched him was only a
cat.

The light was too bad now for Shasta to see much of the cat except that
it was big and very solemn.  It looked as if it might have lived for
long, long years among the tombs, alone.  Its eyes made you think it
knew secrets it would not tell.

"Puss, puss," said Shasta.  "I suppose you're not a _talking_ cat."

The cat stared at him harder than ever.  Then it started walking away,
and of course Shasta followed it.  It led him right through the Tombs
and out on the desert side of them.  There it sat down bolt upright
with its tail curled round its feet and its face set towards the desert
and towards Narnia and the North, as still as if it were watching for
some enemy.  Shasta lay down beside it with his back against the cat
and his face towards the Tombs, because if one is nervous there's
nothing like having your face towards the danger and having something
warm and solid at your back.  The sand wouldn't have seemed very
comfortable to you, but Shasta had been sleeping on the ground for
weeks and hardly noticed it.  Very soon he fell asleep, though even in
his dreams he went on wondering what had happened to Bree and Aravis
and Hwin.

He was wakened suddenly by a noise he had never heard before.  "Perhaps
it was only a nightmare," said Shasta to himself.  At the same moment
he noticed that the cat had gone from his back, and he wished it
hadn't.  But he lay quite still without even opening his eyes because
he felt sure he would be more frightened if he sat up and looked round
at the Tombs and the loneliness: just as you or I might lie still with
the clothes over our heads.  But then the noise came again--a harsh,
piercing cry from behind him out of the desert.  Then of course he had
to open his eyes and sit up.

The moon was shining brightly.  The Tombs--far bigger and nearer than
he had thought they would be--looked grey in the moonlight.  In fact,
they looked horribly like huge people, draped in grey robes that
covered their heads and faces.  They were not at all nice things to
have near you when spending a night alone in a strange place.  But the
noise had come from the opposite side, from the desert.  Shasta had to
turn his back on the Tombs (he didn't like that much) and stare out
across the level sand.  The wild cry rang out again.

"I hope it's not more lions," thought Shasta.  It was in fact not very
like the lion's roars he had heard on the night when they met Hwin and
Aravis, and was really the cry of a jackal.  But of course Shasta did
not know this.  Even if he had known, he would not have wanted very
much to meet a jackal.

The cries rang out again and again.  "There's more than one of them,
whatever they are," thought Shasta.  "And they're coming nearer."

I suppose that if he had been an entirely sensible boy he would have
gone back through the Tombs nearer to the river where there were
houses, and wild beasts would be less likely to come.  But then there
were (or he thought there were) the ghouls.  To go back through the
Tombs would mean going past those dark openings in the Tombs; and what
might come out of them?  It may have been silly, but Shasta felt he had
rather risk the wild beasts.  Then, as the cries came nearer and
nearer, he began to change his mind.

He was just going to run for it when suddenly, between him and the
desert, a huge animal bounded into view.  As the moon was behind it, it
looked quite black, and Shasta did not know what it was, except that it
had a very big, shaggy head and went on four legs.  It did not seem to
have noticed Shasta, for it suddenly stopped, turned its head towards
the desert and let out a roar which re-echoed through the Tombs and
seemed to shake the sand under Shasta's feet.  The cries of the other
creatures suddenly stopped and he thought he could hear feet scampering
away.  Then the great beast turned to examine Shasta.

"It's a lion, I know it's a lion," thought Shasta.  "I'm done.  I
wonder will it hurt much.  I wish it was over.  I wonder does anything
happen to people after they're dead.  O-o-oh!  Here it comes!"  And he
shut his eyes and his teeth tight.

But instead of teeth and claws he only felt something warm lying down
at his feet.  And when he opened his eyes he said, "Why, it's not
nearly as big as I thought!  It's only half the size.  No, it isn't
even quarter the size.  I do declare it's only the cat!!  I must have
dreamed all that about its being as big as a horse."

And whether he really had been dreaming or no, what was now lying at
his feet, and staring him out of countenance with its big, green,
unwinking eyes, was the cat; though certainly one of the largest cats
he had ever seen.

"Oh Puss," gasped Shasta.  "I am so glad to see you again.  I've been
having such horrible dreams."  And he at once lay down again, back to
back with the cat as they had been at the beginning of the night.  The
warmth from it spread all over him.

"I'll never do anything nasty to a cat again as long as I live," said
Shasta, half to the cat and half to himself.  "I did once, you know.  I
threw stones at a half-starved mangy old stray.  Hey!  Stop that."  For
the cat had turned round and given him a scratch.  "None of that," said
Shasta.  "It isn't as if you could understand what I'm saying."  Then
he dozed off.

Next morning when he woke, the cat was gone, the sun was already up,
and the sand hot.  Shasta, very thirsty, sat up and rubbed his eyes.
The desert was blindingly white and, though there was a murmur of
noises from the city behind him, where he sat everything was perfectly
still.  When he looked a little left and west, so that the sun was not
in his eyes, he could see the mountains on the far side of the desert,
so sharp and clear that they looked only a stone's throw away.  He
particularly noticed one blue height that divided into two peaks at the
top and decided that it must be Mount Pire.  "That's our direction,
judging by what the Raven said," he thought, "so I'll just make sure of
it, so as not to waste any time when the others turn up."  So he made a
good, deep straight furrow with his foot pointing exactly to Mount Pire.

The next job, clearly, was to get something to eat and drink.  Shasta
trotted back through the Tombs--they looked quite ordinary now and he
wondered how he could ever have been afraid of them--and down into the
cultivated land by the river's side.  There were a few people about but
not very many, for the city gates had been open several hours and the
early morning crowds had already gone in.  So he had no difficulty in
doing a little "raiding" (as Bree called it).  It involved a climb over
a garden wall and the results were three oranges, a melon, a fig or
two, and a pomegranate.  After that, he went down to the river bank,
but not too near the bridge and had a drink.  The water was so nice
that he took off his hot, dirty clothes and had a dip; for of course
Shasta, having lived on the shore all his life, had learned to swim
almost as soon as he had learned to walk.  When he came out he lay on
the grass looking across the water at Tashbaan--all the splendour and
strength and glory of it.  But that made him remember the dangers of it
too.  He suddenly realised that the others might have reached the Tombs
while he was bathing ("and gone on without me, as likely as not"), so
he dressed in a fright and tore back at such a speed that he was all
hot and thirsty when he arrived and so the good of his bathe was gone.

Like most days when you are alone and waiting for something this day
seemed about a hundred hours long.  He had plenty to think of, of
course, but sitting alone, just thinking, is pretty slow.  He thought a
good deal about the Narnians and especially about Corin.  He wondered
what had happened when they discovered that the boy who had been lying
on the sofa and hearing all their secret plans wasn't really Corin at
all.  It was very unpleasant to think of all those nice people
imagining him a traitor.

But as the sun slowly, slowly climbed up to the top of the sky and then
slowly, slowly began going downwards to the West, and no-one came and
nothing at all happened, he began to get more and more anxious.  And of
course he now realised that when they arranged to wait for one another
at the Tombs no-one had said anything about How Long.  He couldn't wait
here for the rest of his life!  And soon it would be dark again, and he
would have another night just like last night.  A dozen different plans
went through his head, all wretched ones, and at last he fixed on the
worst plan of all.  He decided to wait till it was dark and then go
back to the river and steal as many melons as he could carry and set
out for Mount Pire alone, trusting for his direction to the line he had
drawn that morning in the sand.  It was a crazy idea and if he had read
as many books as you have about journeys over deserts he would never
have dreamed of it.  But Shasta had read no books at all.

But before the sun set something did happen.  Shasta was sitting in the
shadow of one of the Tombs when he looked up and saw two horses coming
towards him.  Then his heart gave a great leap, for he recognised them
as Bree and Hwin.  But next moment his heart went down into his toes
again.  There was no sign of Aravis.  The horses were being led by a
strange man, an armed man pretty handsomely dressed like an upper slave
in a great family.  Bree and Hwin were no longer got up like
packhorses, but saddled and bridled.  And what could it all mean?
"It's a trap," thought Shasta.  "Somebody has caught Aravis and perhaps
they've tortured her and she's given the whole thing away.  They want
me to jump out and run up and speak to Bree and then I'll be caught
too!  And yet if I don't, I may be losing my only chance to meet the
others.  Oh I do wish I knew what had happened."  And he skulked behind
the Tomb, looking out every few minutes, and wondering which was the
least dangerous thing to do.




_Chapter VII_

ARAVIS IN TASHBAAN

What had really happened was this.  When Aravis saw Shasta hurried away
by the Narnians and found herself alone with two horses who (very
wisely) wouldn't say a word, she never lost her head even for a moment.
She grabbed Bree's halter and stood still, holding both the horses; and
though her heart was beating as hard as a hammer, she did nothing to
show it.  As soon as the Narnian lords had passed she tried to move on
again.  But before she could take a step, another crier ("Bother all
these people" thought Aravis) was heard shouting out, "Way, way, way!
Way for the Tarkheena Lasaraleen!" and immediately, following the
crier, came four armed slaves and then four bearers carrying a litter
which was all a-flutter with silken curtains and all a-jingle with
silver bells and which scented the whole street with perfumes and
flowers.  After the litter, female slaves in beautiful clothes, and
then a few grooms, runners, pages, and the like.  And now Aravis made
her first mistake.

She knew Lasaraleen quite well--almost as if they had been at school
together--because they had often stayed in the same houses and been to
the same parties.  And Aravis couldn't help looking up to see what
Lasaraleen looked like now that she was married and a very great person
indeed.

It was fatal.  The eyes of the two girls met.  And immediately
Lasaraleen sat up in the litter and burst out at the top of her voice.

"Aravis!  What on earth are you doing here?  Your father----"

There was not a moment to lose.  Without a second's delay Aravis let go
the horses, caught the edge of the litter, swung herself up beside
Lasaraleen and whispered furiously in her ear.

"Shut up!  Do you hear!  Shut up.  You must hide me.  Tell your
people----"

"But darling----" began Lasaraleen in the same loud voice.  (She didn't
in the least mind making people stare; in fact she rather liked it.)

"Do what I tell you or I'll never speak to you again," hissed Aravis.
"Please, please be quick, Las.  It's frightfully important.  Tell your
people to bring those two horses along.  Pull all the curtains of the
litter and get away somewhere where I can't be found.  And do hurry."

"All right, darling," said Lasaraleen in her lazy voice.  "Here.  Two
of you take the Tarkheena's horses." (This was to the slaves.)  "And
now home.  I say, darling, do you think we really want the curtains
drawn on a day like this?  I mean to say----"

But Aravis had already drawn the curtains, enclosing Lasaraleen and
herself in a rich and scented, but rather stuffy, kind of tent.

"I mustn't be seen," she said.  "My father doesn't know I'm here.  I'm
running away."

"My dear, how perfectly thrilling," said Lasaraleen.  "I'm dying to
hear all about it.  Darling, you're sitting on my dress.  Do you mind?
That's better.  It is a new one.  Do you like it?  I got it at----"

"Oh Las, do be serious," said Aravis.  "Where is my father?"

"Didn't you know?" said Lasaraleen.  "He's here, of course.  He came to
town yesterday and is asking about you everywhere.  And to think of you
and me being here together and his not knowing anything about it!  It's
the funniest thing I ever heard."  And she went off into giggles.  She
always had been a terrible giggler, as Aravis now remembered.

"It isn't funny at all," she said.  "It's dreadfully serious.  Where
can you hide me?"

"No difficulty at all, my dear girl," said Lasaraleen.  "I'll take you
home.  My husband's away and no-one will see you.  Phew!  It's not much
fun with the curtains drawn.  I want to see people.  There's no point
in having a new dress on if one's to go about shut up like this."

"I hope no-one heard you when you shouted out to me like that," said
Aravis.

"No, no, of course, darling," said Lasaraleen absent-mindedly.  "But
you haven't even told me yet what you think of the dress."

"Another thing," said Aravis.  "You must tell your people to treat
those two horses very respectfully.  That's part of the secret.
They're really Talking Horses from Narnia."

"Fancy!" said Lasaraleen.  "How exciting!  And oh, darling, have you
seen the barbarian queen from Narnia?  She's staying in Tashbaan at
present.  They say Prince Rabadash is madly in love with her.  There
have been the most wonderful parties and hunts and things all this last
fortnight.  I can't see that she's so very pretty myself.  But some of
the Narnian men are lovely.  I was taken out on a river party the day
before yesterday, and I was wearing my----"

"How shall we prevent your people telling everyone that you've got a
visitor--dressed like a beggar's brat--in your house?  It might so
easily get round to my father."

"Now don't keep on fussing, there's a dear," said Lasaraleen.  "We'll
get you some proper clothes in a moment.  And here we are!"

The bearers had stopped and the litter was being lowered.  When the
curtains had been drawn Aravis found that she was in a courtyard-garden
very like the one that Shasta had been taken into a few minutes earlier
in another part of the city.  Lasaraleen would have gone indoors at
once but Aravis reminded her in a frantic whisper to say something to
the slaves about not telling anyone of their mistress's strange visitor.

"Sorry, darling, it had gone right out of my head," said Lasaraleen.
"Here.  All of you.  And you, doorkeeper.  No-one is to be let out of
the house to-day.  And anyone I catch talking about this young lady
will be first beaten to death and then burned alive and after that be
kept on bread and water for six weeks.  There."

Although Lasaraleen had said she was dying to hear Aravis's story, she
showed no sign of really wanting to hear it at all.  She was, in fact,
much better at talking than at listening.  She insisted on Aravis
having a long and luxurious bath (Calormene baths are famous) and then
dressing her up in the finest clothes before she would let her explain
anything.  The fuss she made about choosing the dresses nearly drove
Aravis mad.  She remembered now that Lasaraleen had always been like
that, interested in clothes and parties and gossip.  Aravis had always
been more interested in bows and arrows and horses and dogs and
swimming.  You will guess that each thought the other silly.  But when
at last they were both seated after a meal (it was chiefly of the
whipped cream and jelly and fruit and ice sort) in a beautiful pillared
room (which Aravis would have liked better if Lasaraleen's spoiled pet
monkey hadn't been climbing about it all the time) Lasaraleen at last
asked her why she was running away from home.

When Aravis had finished telling her story, Lasaraleen said, "But
darling, why _don't_ you marry Ahoshta Tarkaan?  Everyone's crazy about
him.  My husband says he is beginning to be one of the greatest men in
Calormen.  He has just been made Grand Vizier now old Axartha has died.
Didn't you know?"

"I don't care.  I can't stand the sight of him," said Aravis.

"But darling, only think!  Three palaces, and one of them that
beautiful one down on the lake at Ilkeen.  Positively ropes of pearls,
I'm told.  Baths of asses' milk.  And you'd see such a lot of _me_."

"He can keep his pearls and palaces as far as I'm concerned," said
Aravis.

"You always _were_ a queer girl, Aravis," said Lasaraleen.  "What more
_do_ you want?"

In the end, however, Aravis managed to make her friend believe that she
was in earnest and even to discuss plans.  There would be no difficulty
now about getting the two horses out of the North gate and then on to
the Tombs.  No-one would stop or question a groom in fine clothes
leading a war horse and a lady's saddle horse down to the river, and
Lasaraleen had plenty of grooms to send.  It wasn't so easy to decide
what to do about Aravis herself.  She suggested that she could be
carried out in the litter with the curtains drawn.  But Lasaraleen told
her that litters were only used in the city and the sight of one going
out through the gate would be certain to lead to questions.

When they had talked for a long time--and it was all the longer because
Aravis found it hard to keep her friend to the point--at last
Lasaraleen clapped her hands and said, "Oh, I have an idea.  There is
_one_ way of getting out of the city without using the gates.  The
Tisroc's garden (may he live for ever!) runs right down to the water
and there is a little water-door.  Only for the palace people of
course--but then you know, dear (here she tittered a little) we almost
_are_ palace people.  I say, it is lucky for you that you came to _me_.
The dear Tisroc (may he live for ever!) is so kind.  We're asked to the
palace almost every day and it is like a second home.  I love all the
dear princes and princesses and I positively adore Prince Rabadash.  I
might run in and see any of the palace ladies at any hour of the day or
night.  Why shouldn't I slip in with you, after dark, and let you out
by the water-door?  There are always a few punts and things tied up
outside it.  And even if we were caught----"

"All would be lost," said Aravis.

"Oh darling, don't get so excited," said Lasaraleen.  "I was going to
say, even if we were caught everyone would only say it was one of my
mad jokes.  I'm getting quite well known for them.  Only the other
day--do listen, dear, this is frightfully funny----"

"I meant, all would be lost _for me_," said Aravis a little sharply.

"Oh--ah--yes--I _do_ see what you mean, darling.  Well, can you think
of any better plan?"

Aravis couldn't, and answered, "No.  We'll have to risk it.  When can
we start?"

"Oh, not to-night," said Lasaraleen.  "Of course not to-night.  There's
a great feast on to-night (I must start getting my hair done for it in
a few minutes) and the whole place will be a blaze of lights.  And such
a crowd too!  It would have to be to-morrow night."

This was bad news for Aravis, but she had to make the best of it.  The
afternoon passed very slowly and it was a relief when Lasaraleen went
out to the banquet, for Aravis was very tired of her giggling and her
talk about dresses and parties, weddings and engagements and scandals.
She went to bed early and that part she did enjoy: it was so nice to
have pillows and sheets again.

But the next day passed very slowly.  Lasaraleen wanted to go back on
the whole arrangement and kept on telling Aravis that Narnia was a
country of perpetual snow and ice inhabited by demons and sorcerers,
and she was mad to think of going there.  "And with a peasant boy,
too!" said Lasaraleen.  "Darling, think of it!  It's not Nice."  Aravis
had thought of it a good deal, but she was so tired of Lasaraleen's
silliness by now that, for the first time, she began to think that
travelling with Shasta was really rather more fun than fashionable life
in Tashbaan.  So she only replied, "You forget that I'll be a nobody,
just like him, when we get to Narnia.  And anyway, I promised."

"And to think," said Lasaraleen, almost crying, "that if only you had
sense you could be the wife of a Grand Vizier!"  Aravis went away to
have a private word with the horses.

"You must go with a groom a little before sunset down to the Tombs,"
she said.  "No more of those packs.  You'll be saddled and bridled
again.  But there'll have to be food in Hwin's saddle-bags and a full
water-skin behind yours, Bree.  The man has orders to let you both have
a good long drink at the far side of the bridge."

"And then, Narnia and the North!" whispered Bree.  "But what if Shasta
is not at the Tombs?"

"Wait for him of course," said Aravis.  "I hope you've been quite
comfortable."

"Never better stabled in my life," said Bree.  "But if the husband of
that tittering Tarkheena friend of yours is paying his head groom to
get the best oats, then I think the head groom is cheating him."

Aravis and Lasaraleen had supper in the pillared room.

About two hours later they were ready to start.  Aravis was dressed to
look like a superior slave-girl in a great house and wore a veil over
her face.  They had agreed that if any questions were asked Lasaraleen
would pretend that Aravis was a slave she was taking as a present to
one of the princesses.

The two girls went out on foot.  A very few minutes brought them to the
palace gates.  Here there were of course soldiers on guard but the
officer knew Lasaraleen quite well and called his men to attention and
saluted.  They passed at once into the Hall of Black Marble.  A fair
number of courtiers, slaves and others were still moving about here but
this only made the two girls less conspicuous.  They passed on into the
Hall of Pillars and then into the Hall of Statues and down the
colonnade, passing the great beaten-copper doors of the throne room.
It was all magnificent beyond description; what they could see of it in
the dim light of the lamps.

Presently they came out into the garden-court which sloped downhill in
a number of terraces.  On the far side of that they came to the Old
Palace.  It had already grown almost quite dark and they now found
themselves in a maze of corridors lit only by occasional torches fixed
in brackets to the walls.  Lasaraleen halted at a place where you had
to go either left or right.

"Go on, do go on," whispered Aravis, whose heart was beating terribly
and who still felt that her father might run into them at any corner.

"I'm just wondering..." said Lasaraleen.  "I'm not absolutely sure
which way we go from here.  I _think_ it's the left.  Yes, I'm almost
sure it's the left.  What fun this is!"

They took the left hand way and found themselves in a passage that was
hardly lighted at all and which soon began going down steps.

"It's all right," said Lasaraleen.  "I'm sure we're right now.  I
remember these steps."  But at that moment a moving light appeared
ahead.  A second later there appeared from round a distant corner, the
dark shapes of two men walking backwards and carrying tall candles.
And of course it is only before royalties that people walk backwards.
Aravis felt Lasaraleen grip her arm--that sort of sudden grip which is
almost a pinch and which means that the person who is gripping you is
very frightened indeed.  Aravis thought it odd that Lasaraleen should
be so afraid of the Tisroc if he were really such a friend of hers, but
there was no time to go on thinking.  Lasaraleen was hurrying her back
to the top of the steps, on tiptoe, and groping wildly along the wall.

"Here's a door," she whispered.  "Quick."

They went in, drew the door very softly behind them, and found
themselves in pitch darkness.  Aravis could hear by Lasaraleen's
breathing that she was terrified.

"Tash preserve us!" whispered Lasaraleen.  "What _shall_ we do if he
comes in here.  Can we hide?"

There was a soft carpet under their feet.  They groped forward into the
room and blundered onto a sofa.

"Let's lie down behind it," whimpered Lasaraleen.  "Oh, I _do_ wish we
hadn't come."

There was just room between the sofa and the curtained wall and the two
girls got down.  Lasaraleen managed to get the better position and was
completely covered.  The upper part of Aravis's face stuck out beyond
the sofa, so that if anyone came into that room with a light and
happened to look in exactly the right place they would see her.  But of
course, because she was wearing a veil, what they saw would not at once
look like a forehead and a pair of eyes.  Aravis shoved desperately to
try to make Lasaraleen give her a little more room.  But Lasaraleen,
now quite selfish in her panic, fought back and pinched her feet.  They
gave it up and lay still, panting a little.  Their own breath seemed
dreadfully noisy, but there was no other noise.

"Is it safe?" said Aravis at last in the tiniest possible whisper.

"I--I--_think_ so," began Lasaraleen.  "But my poor nerves----" and
then came the most terrible noise they could have heard at that moment:
the noise of the door opening.  And then came light.  And because
Aravis couldn't get her head any further in behind the sofa, she saw
everything.

First came the two slaves (deaf and dumb, as Aravis rightly guessed,
and therefore used at the most secret councils) walking backwards and
carrying the candles.  They took up their stand one at each end of the
sofa.  This was a good thing, for of course it was now harder for
anyone to see Aravis once a slave was in front of her and she was
looking between his heels.  Then came an old man, very fat, wearing a
curious pointed cap by which she immediately knew that he was the
Tisroc.  The least of the jewels with which he was covered was worth
more than all the clothes and weapons of the Narnian lords put
together: but he was so fat and such a mass of frills and pleats and
bobbles and buttons and tassels and talismans that Aravis couldn't help
thinking the Narnian fashions (at any rate for men) looked nicer.
After him came a tall young man with a feathered and jewelled turban on
his head and an ivory-sheathed scimitar at his side.  He seemed very
excited and his eyes and teeth flashed fiercely in the candlelight.
Last of all came a little hump-backed, wizened old man in whom she
recognised with a shudder the new Grand Vizier and her own betrothed
husband, Ahoshta Tarkaan himself.

As soon as all three had entered the room and the door was shut, the
Tisroc seated himself on the divan with a sigh of contentment, the
young man took his place, standing, before him and the Grand Vizier got
down on his knees and elbows and laid his face flat on the carpet.




_Chapter VIII_

IN THE HOUSE OF THE TISROC

"Oh-my-father-and-oh-the-delight-of-my-eyes," began the young man,
muttering the words very quickly and sulkily and not at all as if the
Tisroc were the delight of his eyes.  "May you live for ever, but you
have utterly destroyed me.  If you had given me the swiftest of the
galleys at sunrise when I first saw that the ship of the accursed
barbarians was gone from her place I would perhaps have overtaken them.
But you persuaded me to send first and see if they had not merely moved
round the point into better anchorage.  And now the whole day has been
wasted.  And they are gone--gone--out of my reach!  The false jade,
the----" and here he added a great many descriptions of Queen Susan
which would not look at all nice in print.  For of course this young
man was Prince Rabadash and of course the false jade was Susan of
Narnia.

"Compose yourself, O my son," said the Tisroc.  "For the departure of
guests makes a wound that is easily healed in the heart of a judicious
host."

"But I _want_ her," cried the Prince.  "I must have her.  I shall die
if I do not get her--false, proud, black-hearted daughter of a dog that
she is!  I cannot sleep and my food has no savour and my eyes are
darkened because of her beauty.  I must have the barbarian queen."

"How well it was said by a gifted poet," observed the Vizier, raising
his face (in a somewhat dusty condition) from the carpet, "that deep
draughts from the fountain of reason are desirable in order to
extinguish the fire of youthful love."

This seemed to exasperate the Prince.  "Dog," he shouted, directing a
series of well-aimed kicks at the hindquarters of the Vizier, "do not
dare to quote the poets to me.  I have had maxims and verses flung at
me all day and I can endure them no more."  I am afraid Aravis did not
feel at all sorry for the Vizier.

The Tisroc was apparently sunk in thought, but when, after a long
pause, he noticed what was happening, he said tranquilly:

"My son, by all means desist from kicking the venerable and enlightened
Vizier: for as a costly jewel retains its value even if hidden in a
dung-hill, so old age and discretion are to be respected even in the
vile persons of our subjects.  Desist therefore, and tell us what you
desire and propose."

"I desire and propose, O my father," said Rabadash, "that you
immediately call out your invincible armies and invade the
thrice-accursed land of Narnia and waste it with fire and sword and add
it to your illimitable empire, killing their High King and all of his
blood except the Queen Susan.  For I must have her as my wife, though
she shall learn a sharp lesson first."

"Understand, O my son," said the Tisroc, "that no words you can speak
will move me to an open war against Narnia."

"If you were not my father, O ever-living Tisroc," said the Prince,
grinding his teeth.  "I should say that was the word of a coward."

"And if you were not my son, O most inflammable Rabadash," replied his
father, "your life would be short and your death slow when you had said
it."  (The cool, placid voice in which he spoke these words made
Aravis's blood run cold.)

"But why, O my father," said the Prince--this time in a much more
respectful voice, "why should we think twice about punishing Narnia any
more than about hanging an idle slave or sending a worn-out horse to be
made into dog's-meat?  It is not the fourth size of one of your least
provinces.  A thousand spears could conquer it in five weeks.  It is an
unseemly blot on the skirts of your empire."

"Most undoubtedly," said the Tisroc.  "These little barbarian countries
that call themselves _free_ (which is as much as to say, idle,
disordered, and unprofitable) are hateful to the gods and to all
persons of discernment."

"Then why have we suffered such a land as Narnia to remain thus long
unsubdued?"

"Know, O enlightened Prince," said the Grand Vizier, "that until the
year in which your exalted father began his salutary and unending
reign, the land of Narnia was covered with ice and snow and was
moreover ruled by a most powerful enchantress."

"This I know very well, O loquacious Vizier," answered the Prince.
"But I know also that the enchantress is dead.  And the ice and snow
have vanished, so that Narnia is now wholesome, fruitful, and
delicious."

"And this change, O most learned Prince, has doubtless been brought to
pass by the powerful incantations of those wicked persons who now call
themselves kings and queens of Narnia."

"I am rather of the opinion," said Rabadash, "that it has come about by
the alteration of the stars and the operation of natural causes."

"All this," said the Tisroc, "is a question for the disputations of
learned men.  I will never believe that so great an alteration, and the
killing of the old enchantress, were effected without the aid of strong
magic.  And such things are to be expected in that land, which is
chiefly inhabited by demons in the shape of beasts that talk like men,
and monsters that are half man and half beast.  It is commonly reported
that the High King of Narnia (whom may the gods utterly reject) is
supported by a demon of hideous aspect and irresistible maleficence who
appears in the shape of a Lion.  Therefore the attacking of Narnia is a
dark and doubtful enterprise, and I am determined not to put my hand
out farther than I can draw it back."

"How blessed is Calormen," said the Vizier, popping up his face again,
"on whose ruler the gods have been pleased to bestow prudence and
circumspection!  Yet as the irrefutable and sapient Tisroc has said it
is very grievous to be constrained to keep our hands off such a dainty
dish as Narnia.  Gifted was that poet who said----" but at this point
Ahoshta noticed an impatient movement of the Prince's toe and became
suddenly silent.

"It is very grievous," said the Tisroc in his deep, quiet voice.
"Every morning the sun is darkened in my eyes, and every night my sleep
is the less refreshing, because I remember that Narnia is still free."

"O my father," said Rabadash.  "How if I show you a way by which you
can stretch out your arm to take Narnia and yet draw it back unharmed
if the attempt prove unfortunate?"

"If you can show me that, O Rabadash," said the Tisroc, "you will be
the best of sons."

"Hear then, O father.  This very night and in this hour I will take but
two hundred horse and ride across the desert.  And it shall seem to all
men that you know nothing of my going.  On the second morning I shall
be at the gates of King Lune's castle of Anvard in Archenland.  They
are at peace with us and unprepared and I shall take Anvard before they
have bestirred themselves.  Then I will ride through the pass above
Anvard and down through Narnia to Cair Paravel.  The High King will not
be there; when I left them he was already preparing a raid against the
giants on his northern border.  I shall find Cair Paravel, most likely,
with open gates and ride in.  I shall exercise prudence and courtesy
and spill as little Narnian blood as I can.  And what then remains but
to sit there till the _Splendour Hyaline_ puts in, with Queen Susan on
board, catch my strayed bird as she sets foot ashore, swing her into
the saddle, and then ride, ride, ride back to Anvard?"

"But is it not probable, O my son," said the Tisroc, "that at the
taking of the woman either King Edmund or you will lose his life?"

"They will be a small company," said Rabadash, "and I will order ten of
my men to disarm and bind him: restraining my vehement desire for his
blood so that there shall be no deadly cause of war between you and the
High King."

"And how if the _Splendour Hyaline_ is at Cair Paravel before you?"

"I do not look for that with these winds, O my father."

"And lastly, O my resourceful son," said the Tisroc, "you have made
clear how all this might give you the barbarian woman, but not how it
helps me to the overthrowing of Narnia."

"O my father, can it have escaped you that though I and my horsemen
will come and go through Narnia like an arrow from a bow, yet we shall
have Anvard for ever?  And when you hold Anvard you sit in the very
gate of Narnia, and your garrison in Anvard can be increased by little
and little till it is a great host."

"It is spoken with understanding and foresight.  But how do I draw back
my arm if all this miscarries?"

"You shall say that I did it without your knowledge and against your
will, and without your blessing, being constrained by the violence of
my love and the impetuosity of youth."

"And how if the High King then demands that we send back the barbarian
woman, his sister?"

"O my father, be assured that he will not.  For though the fancy of a
woman has rejected this marriage, the High King Peter is a man of
prudence and understanding who will in no way wish to lose the high
honour and advantage of being allied to our House and seeing his nephew
and grand nephew on the throne of Calormen."

"He will not see that if I live for ever as is no doubt your wish,"
said the Tisroc in an even drier voice than usual.

"And also, O my father and O the delight of my eyes," said the Prince,
after a moment of awkward silence, "we shall write letters as if from
the Queen to say that she loves me and has no desire to return to
Narnia.  For it is well known that women are as changeable as
weather-cocks.  And even if they do not wholly believe the letters,
they will not dare to come to Tashbaan in arms to fetch her."

"O enlightened Vizier," said the Tisroc, "bestow your wisdom upon us
concerning this strange proposal."

"O eternal Tisroc," answered Ahoshta, "the strength of paternal
affection is not unknown to me and I have often heard that sons are in
the eyes of their fathers more precious than carbuncles.  How then
shall I dare freely to unfold to you my mind in a matter which may
imperil the life of this exalted Prince?"

"Undoubtedly you will dare," replied the Tisroc.  "Because you will
find that the dangers of not doing so are at least equally great."

"To hear is to obey," moaned the wretched man.  "Know then, O most
reasonable Tisroc, in the first place, that the danger of the Prince is
not altogether so great as might appear.  For the gods have withheld
from the barbarians the light of discretion, as that their poetry is
not, like ours, full of choice apophthegms and useful maxims, but is
all of love and war.  Therefore nothing will appear to them more noble
and admirable than such a mad enterprise as this of--ow!"  For the
Prince, at the word "mad", had kicked him again.

"Desist, O my son," said the Tisroc.  "And you, estimable Vizier,
whether he desists or not, by no means allow the flow of your eloquence
to be interrupted.  For nothing is more suitable to persons of gravity
and decorum than to endure minor inconveniences with constancy."

"To hear is to obey," said the Vizier, wriggling himself round a little
so as to get his hinder parts further away from Rabadash's toe.
"Nothing, I say, will seem as pardonable, if not estimable, in their
eyes as this--er--hazardous attempt, especially because it is
undertaken for the love of a woman.  Therefore, if the Prince by
misfortune fell into their hands, they would assuredly not kill him.
Nay, it may even be, that though he failed to carry off the queen, yet
the sight of his great valour and of the extremity of his passion might
incline her heart to him."

"That is a good point, old babbler," said Rabadash.  "Very good,
however it came into your ugly head."

"The praise of my masters is the light of my eyes," said Ahoshta.  "And
secondly, O Tisroc, whose reign must and shall be interminable, I think
that with the aid of the gods it is very likely that Anvard will fall
into the Prince's hands.  And if so, we have Narnia by the throat."

There was a long pause and the room became so silent that the two girls
hardly dared to breathe.  At last the Tisroc spoke.

"Go, my son," he said.  "And do as you have said.  But expect no help
nor countenance from me.  I will not avenge you if you are killed and I
will not deliver you if the barbarians cast you into prison.  And if,
either in success or failure, you shed a drop more than you need of
Narnian noble blood and open war arises from it, my favour shall never
fall upon you again and your next brother shall have your place in
Calormen.  Now go.  Be swift, secret, and fortunate.  May the strength
of Tash the inexorable, the irresistible be in your sword and lance."

"To hear is to obey," cried Rabadash, and after kneeling for a moment
to kiss his father's hands he rushed from the room.  Greatly to the
disappointment of Aravis, who was now horribly cramped, the Tisroc and
the Vizier remained.

"O Vizier," said the Tisroc, "is it certain that no living soul knows
of this council we three have held here to-night?"

"O my master," said Ahoshta, "it is not possible that any should know.
For that very reason I proposed, and you in your infallible wisdom
agreed, that we should meet here in the Old Palace where no council is
ever held and none of the household has any occasion to come."

"It is well," said the Tisroc.  "If any man knew, I would see to it
that he died before an hour had passed.  And do you also, O prudent
Vizier, forget it.  I sponge away from my own heart and from yours all
knowledge of the Prince's plans.  He is gone without my knowledge or my
consent, I know not whither, because of his violence and the rash and
disobedient disposition of youth.  No man will be more astonished than
you and I to hear that Anvard is in his hands."

"To hear is to obey," said Ahoshta.

"That is why you will never think even in your secret heart that I am
the hardest hearted of fathers who thus send my first-born son on an
errand so likely to be his death; pleasing as it must be to you who do
not love the Prince.  For I see into the bottom of your mind."

"O impeccable Tisroc," said the Vizier.  "In comparison with you I love
neither the Prince nor my own life nor bread nor water nor the light of
the sun."

"Your sentiments," said the Tisroc, "are elevated and correct.  I also
love none of these things in comparison with the glory and strength of
my throne.  If the Prince succeeds, we have Archenland, and perhaps
hereafter Narnia.  If he fails--I have eighteen other sons and
Rabadash, after the manner of the eldest sons of kings, was beginning
to be dangerous.  More than five Tisrocs in Tashbaan have died before
their time because their eldest sons, enlightened princes, grew tired
of waiting for their throne.  He had better cool his blood abroad than
boil it in inaction here.  And now, O excellent Vizier, the excess of
my paternal anxiety inclines me to sleep.  Command the musicians to my
chamber.  But before you lie down, call back the pardon we wrote for
the third cook.  I feel within me the manifest prognostics of
indigestion."

"To hear is to obey," said the Grand Vizier.  He crawled backwards on
all fours to the door, rose, bowed, and went out.  Even then the Tisroc
remained seated in silence on the divan till Aravas almost began to be
afraid that he had dropped asleep.  But at last with a great creaking
and sighing he heaved up his enormous body, signed to the slaves to
precede him with the lights and went out.  The door closed behind him,
the room was once more totally dark, and the two girls could breathe
freely again.




_Chapter IX_

ACROSS THE DESERT

"How dreadful!  How perfectly dreadful!" whimpered Lasaraleen.  "Oh
darling, I _am_ so frightened.  I'm shaking all over.  Feel me."

"Come on," said Aravis, who was trembling herself.  "They've gone back
to the new palace.  Once we're out of this room we're safe enough.  But
it's wasted a terrible time.  Get me down to that water-gate as quick
as you can."

"Darling, how _can_ you?" squeaked Lasaraleen.  "I can't do
anything--not now.  My poor nerves!  No: we must just lie still a bit
and then go back."

"Why back?" asked Aravis.

"Oh, you don't understand.  You're so unsympathetic," said Lasaraleen,
beginning to cry.  Aravis decided it was no occasion for mercy.

"Look here!" she said, catching Lasaraleen and giving her a good shake.
"If you say another word about going back, and if you don't start
taking me to that water-gate at once--do you know what I'll do?  I'll
rush out into that passage and scream.  Then we'll both be caught."

"But we shall both be k-k-killed!" said Lasaraleen.  "Didn't you hear
what the Tisroc (may he live for ever) said?"

"Yes, and I'd sooner be killed than married to Ahoshta.  So come _on_."

"Oh you _are_ unkind," said Lasaraleen.  "And I in such a state!"

But in the end she had to give in to Aravis.  She led the way down the
steps they had already descended, and along another corridor and so
finally out into the open air.  They were now in the palace garden
which sloped down in terraces to the city wall.  The moon shone
brightly.  One of the drawbacks about adventures is that when you come
to the most beautiful places you are often too anxious and hurried to
appreciate them; so that Aravis (though she remembered them years
later) had only a vague impression of grey lawns, quietly bubbling
fountains, and the long black shadows of cypress trees.

When they reached the very bottom and the wall rose frowning above
them, Lasaraleen was shaking so that she could not unbolt the gate.
Aravis did it.  There, at last, was the river, full of reflected
moonlight, and a little landing stage and a few pleasure boats.

"Good-bye," said Aravis, "and thank you.  I'm sorry if I've been a pig.
But think what I'm flying from!"

"Oh Aravis darling," said Lasaraleen.  "Won't you change your mind?
Now that you've seen what a very great man Ahoshta is!"

"Great man!" said Aravis.  "A hideous grovelling slave who flatters
when he's kicked but treasures it all up and hopes to get his own back
by egging on that horrible Tisroc to plot his son's death.  Faugh!  I'd
sooner marry my father's scullion than a creature like that."

"Oh Aravis, Aravis!  How can you say such dreadful things; and about
the Tisroc (may he live for ever) too.  It must be right if _he's_
going to do it!"

"Good-bye," said Aravis, "and I thought your dresses lovely.  And I
think your house is lovely too.  I'm sure you'll have a lovely
life--though it wouldn't suit me.  Close the door softly behind me."

She tore herself away from her friend's affectionate embraces, stepped
into a punt, cast off, and a moment later was out in midstream, with a
huge real moon overhead and a huge reflected moon down, deep down, in
the river.  The air was fresh and cool and as she drew near the further
bank she heard the hooting of an owl.  "Ah!  That's better!" thought
Aravis.  She had always lived in the country and had hated every minute
of her time in Tashbaan.

When she stepped ashore she found herself in darkness for the rise of
the ground, and the trees, cut off the moonlight.  But she managed to
find the same road that Shasta had found, and came just as he had done
to the end of the grass and the beginning of the sand, and looked (like
him) to her left and saw the big, black Tombs.  And now at last, brave
girl though she was, her heart quailed.  Supposing the others weren't
there!  Supposing the ghouls were!  But she stuck out her chin (and a
little bit of her tongue too) and went straight towards them.

But before she had reached them she saw Bree and Hwin and the groom.

"You can go back to your mistress now," said Aravis (quite forgetting
that he couldn't, until the city gates opened next morning).  "Here is
money for your pains."

"To hear is to obey," said the groom, and at once set off at a
remarkable speed in the direction of the city.  There was no need to
tell him to make haste: he also had been thinking a good deal about
ghouls.

For the next few seconds Aravis was busy kissing the noses and patting
the necks of Hwin and Bree just as if they were quite ordinary horses.

"And here comes Shasta!  Thanks be to the Lion!" said Bree.

Aravis looked round, and there, right enough, was Shasta who had come
out of hiding the moment he saw the groom going away.

"And now," said Aravis.  "There's not a moment to lose."  And in hasty
words she told them about Rabadash's expedition.

"Treacherous hounds!" said Bree, shaking his mane and stamping with his
hoof.  "An attack in time of peace, without defiance sent!  But we'll
grease his oats for him.  We'll be there before he is."

"Can we?" said Aravis, swinging herself into Hwin's saddle.  Shasta
wished he could mount like that.

"Brooh-hooh!" snorted Bree.  "Up you get, Shasta.  Can we!  And with a
good start too!"

"He said he was going to start at once," said Aravis.

"That's how humans talk," said Bree.  "But you don't get a company of
two hundred horse and horsemen watered and victualled and armed and
saddled and started all in a minute.  Now: what's our direction?  Due
North?"

"No," said Shasta.  "I know about that.  I've drawn a line.  I'll
explain later.  Bear a bit to our left, both you horses.  Ah--here it
is!"

"Now," said Bree.  "All that about galloping for a day and a night,
like in stories, can't really be done.  It must be walk and trot: but
brisk trots and short walks.  And whenever we walk you two humans can
slip off and walk too.  Now.  Are you ready, Hwin?  Off we go.  Narnia
and the North!"

At first it was delightful.  The night had now been going on for so
many hours that the sand had almost finished giving back all the
sun-heat it had received during the day, and the air was cool, fresh,
and clear.  Under the moonlight the sand, in every direction and as far
as they could see, gleamed as if it were smooth water or a great silver
tray.  Except for the noise of Bree's and Hwin's hoofs there was not a
sound to be heard.  Shasta would nearly have fallen asleep if he had
not had to dismount and walk every now and then.

This seemed to last for hours.  Then there came a time when there was
no longer any moon.  They seemed to ride in the dead darkness for hours
and hours.  And after that there came a moment when Shasta noticed that
he could see Bree's neck and head in front of him a little more clearly
than before; and slowly, very slowly, he began to notice the vast grey
flatness on every side.  It looked absolutely dead, like something in a
dead world; and Shasta felt quite terribly tired and noticed that he
was getting cold and that his lips were dry.  And all the time the
squeak of the leather, the jingle of the bits, and the noise of the
hoofs--not _Propputty-propputty_ as it would be on a hard road, but
_Thubbudy-thubbudy_ on the dry sand.

At last, after hours of riding, far away on his right there came a
single long streak of paler grey, low down on the horizon.  Then a
streak of red.  It was the morning at last, but without a single bird
to sing about it.  He was glad of the walking bits now, for he was
colder than ever.

Then suddenly the sun rose and everything changed in a moment.  The
grey sand turned yellow and twinkled as if it was strewn with diamonds.
On their left the shadows of Shasta and Hwin and Bree and Aravis,
enormously long, raced beside them.  The double peak of Mount Pire, far
ahead, flashed in the sunlight and Shasta saw they were a little out of
the course.  "A bit left, a bit left," he sang out.  Best of all, when
you looked back, Tashbaan was already small and remote.  The Tombs were
quite invisible: swallowed up in that single, jagged-edged hump which
was the city of the Tisroc.  Everyone felt better.

But not for long.  Though Tashbaan looked very far away when they first
saw it, it refused to look any further away as they went on.  Shasta
gave up looking back at it, for it only gave him the feeling that they
were not moving at all.  Then the light became a nuisance.  The glare
of the sand made his eyes ache: but he knew he mustn't shut them.  He
must screw them up and keep on looking ahead at Mount Pire and shouting
out directions.  Then came the heat.  He noticed it for the first time
when he had to dismount and walk: as he slipped down to the sand the
heat from it struck up into his face as if from the opening of an oven
door.  Next time it was worse.  But the third time, as his bare feet
touched the sand he screamed with pain and got one foot back in the
stirrup and the other half over Bree's back before you could have said
knife.

"Sorry, Bree," he gasped.  "I can't walk.  It burns my feet."

"Of course!" panted Bree.  "Should have thought of that myself.  Stay
on.  Can't be helped."

"It's all right for _you_," said Shasta to Aravis who was walking
beside Hwin.  "You've got shoes on."

Aravis said nothing and looked prim.  Let's hope she didn't mean to,
but she did.

On again, trot and walk and trot, jingle-jingle-jingle,
squeak-squeak-squeak, smell of hot horse, smell of hot self, blinding
glare, headache.  And nothing at all different for mile after mile.
Tashbaan would never look any further away.  The mountains would never
look any nearer.  You felt this had been going on for
always--jingle-jingle-jingle, squeak-squeak-squeak, smell of hot horse,
smell of hot self.

Of course one tried all sorts of games with oneself to try to make the
time pass: and of course they were all no good.  And one tried very
hard not to think of drinks--iced sherbet in a palace at Tashbaan,
clear spring water tinkling with a dark earthy sound, cold, smooth milk
just creamy enough and not too creamy--and the harder you tried not to
think, the more you thought.

At last there was something different--a mass of rock sticking up out
of the sand about fifty yards long and thirty feet high.  It did not
cast much shadow, for the sun was now very high, but it cast a little.
Into that shade they crowded.  There they ate some food and drank a
little water.  It is not easy giving a horse a drink out of a skin
bottle, but Bree and Hwin were clever with their lips.  No-one had
anything like enough.  No-one spoke.  The horses were flecked with foam
and their breathing was noisy.  The children were pale.

After a very short rest they went on again.  Same noises, same smells,
same glare, till at last their shadows began to fall on their right,
and then got longer and longer till they seemed to stretch out to the
eastern end of the world.  Very slowly the sun drew nearer to the
western horizon.  And now at last he was down and, thank goodness, the
merciless glare was gone, though the heat coming up from the sand was
still as bad as ever.  Four pairs of eyes were looking out eagerly for
any sign of the valley that Sallowpad the Raven had spoken about.  But,
mile after mile, there was nothing but level sand.  And now the day was
quite definitely done, and most of the stars were out, and still the
Horses thundered on and the children rose and sank in their saddles,
miserable with thirst and weariness.  Not till the moon had risen did
Shasta--in the strange, barking voice of someone whose mouth is
perfectly dry--shout out:

"There it is!"

There was no mistaking it now.  Ahead, and a little to their right,
there was at last a slope: a slope downward and hummocks of rock on
each side.  The Horses were far too tired to speak but they swung round
towards it and in a minute or two they were entering the gully.  At
first it was worse in there than it had been out in the open desert,
for there was a breathless stuffiness between the rocky walls and less
moonlight.  The slope continued steeply downwards and the rocks on
either hand rose to the height of cliffs.  Then they began to meet
vegetation--prickly cactus-like plants and coarse grass of the kind
that would prick your fingers.  Soon the horse-hoofs were falling on
pebbles and stones instead of sand.  Round every bend of the
valley--and it had many bends--they looked eagerly for water.  The
Horses were nearly at the end of their strength now, and Hwin,
stumbling and panting, was lagging behind Bree.  They were almost in
despair before at last they came to a little muddiness and a tiny
trickle of water through softer and better grass.  And the trickle
became a brook, and the brook became a stream with bushes on each side,
and the stream became a river, and there came (after more
disappointments than I could possibly describe) a moment when Shasta,
who had been in a kind of doze, suddenly realised that Bree had stopped
and found himself slipping off.  Before them a little cataract of water
poured into a broad pool: and both the Horses were already in the pool
with their heads down, drinking, drinking, drinking.  "O-o-oh," said
Shasta and plunged in--it was about up to his knees--and stooped his
head right into the cataract.  It was perhaps the loveliest moment in
his life.

It was about ten minutes later when all four of them (the two children
wet nearly all over) came out and began to notice their surroundings.
The moon was now high enough to peep down into the valley.  There was
soft grass on both sides of the river, and beyond the grass, trees and
bushes sloped up to the bases of the cliffs.  There must have been some
wonderful flowering shrubs hidden in that shadowy undergrowth for the
whole glade was full of the coolest and most delicious smells.  And out
of the darkest recess among the trees there came a sound Shasta had
never heard before--a nightingale.

Everyone was much too tired to speak or to eat.  The Horses, without
waiting to be unsaddled, lay down at once.  So did Aravis and Shasta.

About ten minutes later the careful Hwin said, "But we mustn't go to
sleep.  We've got to keep ahead of that Rabadash."

"No," said Bree very slowly.  "Mustn't go sleep.  Just a little rest."

Shasta knew (for a moment) that they would all go to sleep if he didn't
get up and do something about it, and felt that he ought to.  In fact
he decided that he would get up and persuade them to go on.  But
presently; not yet: not just yet....

Very soon the moon shone and the nightingale sang over two horses and
two human children, all fast asleep.

It was Aravis who awoke first.  The sun was already high in the heavens
and the cool morning hours were already wasted.  "It's my fault," she
said to herself furiously as she jumped up and began rousing the
others.  "One wouldn't expect Horses to keep awake after a day's work
like that, even if they _can_ talk.  And of course that Boy wouldn't;
he's had no decent training.  But _I_ ought to have known better."

The others were dazed and stupid with the heaviness of their sleep.

"Heigh-ho--broo-hoo," said Bree.  "Been sleeping in my saddle, eh?
I'll never do that again.  Most uncomfortable----"

"Oh come on, come on," said Aravis.  "We've lost half the morning
already.  There isn't a moment to spare."

"A fellow's got to have a mouthful of grass," said Bree.

"I'm afraid we can't wait," said Aravis.

"What's the terrible hurry?" said Bree.  "We've crossed the desert,
haven't we?"

"But we're not in Archenland yet," said Aravis.  "And we've got to get
there before Rabadash."

"Oh, we must be miles ahead of him," said Bree.  "Haven't we been
coming a shorter way?  Didn't that Raven friend of yours say this was a
short cut, Shasta?"

"He didn't say anything about _shorter_," answered Shasta.  "He only
said _better_, because you got to a river this way.  If the oasis is
due North of Tashbaan, then I'm afraid this may be longer."

"Well I can't go on without a snack," said Bree.  "Take my bridle off,
Shasta."

"P-please," said Hwin, very shyly, "I feel just like Bree that I
_can't_ go on.  But when Horses have humans (with spurs and things) on
their backs, aren't they often made to go on when they're feeling like
this? and then they find they can.  I m-mean--oughtn't we to be able to
do even more, now that we're free.  It's all for Narnia."

"I think, Ma'am," said Bree very crushingly, "that I know a little more
about campaigns and forced marches and what a horse can stand than you
do."

To this Hwin made no answer, being, like most highly bred mares, a very
nervous and gentle person who was easily put down.  In reality she was
quite right, and if Bree had had a Tarkaan on his back at that moment
to make him go on, he would have found that he was good for several
hours' hard going.  But one of the worst results of being a slave and
being forced to do things is that when there is no-one to force you any
more you find you have almost lost the power of forcing yourself.

So they had to wait while Bree had a snack and a drink, and of course
Hwin and the children had a snack and a drink too.  It must have been
nearly eleven o'clock in the morning before they finally got going
again.  And even then Bree took things much more gently than yesterday.
It was really Hwin, though she was the weaker and more tired of the
two, who set the pace.

The valley itself, with its brown, cool river, and grass and moss and
wild flowers and rhododendrons, was such a pleasant place that it made
you want to ride slowly.




_Chapter X_

THE HERMIT OF THE SOUTHERN MARCH

After they had ridden for several hours down the valley, it widened out
and they could see what was ahead of them.  The river which they had
been following here joined a broader river, wide and turbulent, which
flowed from their left to their right, towards the east.  Beyond this
new river a delightful country rose gently in low hills, ridge beyond
ridge, to the Northern Mountains themselves.  To the right there were
rocky pinnacles, one or two of them with snow clinging to the ledges.
To the left, pine-clad slopes, frowning cliffs, narrow gorges, and blue
peaks stretched away as far as the eye could reach.  He could no longer
make out Mount Pire.  Straight ahead the mountain range sank to a
wooded saddle which of course must be the pass from Archenland into
Narnia.

"Broo-hoo-hoo, the North, the green North!" neighed Bree: and certainly
the lower hills looked greener and fresher than anything that Aravis
and Shasta, with their southern-bred eyes, had ever imagined.  Spirits
rose as they clattered down to the water's-meet of the two rivers.

The eastern-flowing river, which was pouring from the higher mountains
at the western end of the range, was far too swift and too broken with
rapids for them to think of swimming it; but after some casting about,
up and down the bank, they found a place shallow enough to wade.  The
roar and clatter of water, the great swirl against the horses'
fetlocks, the cool, stirring air and the darting dragon-flies, filled
Shasta with a strange excitement.

"Friends, we are in Archenland!" said Bree proudly as he splashed and
churned his way out on the northern bank.  "I think that river we've
just crossed is called the Winding Arrow."

"I hope we're in time," murmured Hwin.

Then they began going up, slowly and zigzagging a good deal, for the
hills were steep.  It was all open park-like country with no roads or
houses in sight.  Scattered trees, never thick enough to be a forest,
were everywhere.  Shasta, who had lived all his life in an almost
tree-less grassland, had never seen so many or so many kinds.  If you
had been there you would probably have known (he didn't) that he was
seeing oaks, beeches, silver birches, rowans and sweet chestnuts.
Rabbits scurried away in every direction as they advanced, and
presently they saw a whole herd of fallow deer making off among the
trees.

"Isn't it simply glorious!" said Aravis.

At the first ridge Shasta turned in the saddle and looked back.  There
was no sign of Tashbaan; the desert, unbroken except by the narrow
green crack which they had travelled down, spread to the horizon.

"Hullo!" he said suddenly.  "What's that?"

"What's what?" said Bree, turning round.  Hwin and Aravis did the same.

"That," said Shasta, pointing.  "It looks like smoke.  Is it a fire?"

"Sand-storm, I should say," said Bree.

"Not much wind to raise it," said Aravis.

"Oh!" exclaimed Hwin.  "Look!  There are things flashing in it.  Look!
They're helmets--and armour.  And it's moving: moving this way."

"By Tash!" said Aravis.  "It's the army.  It's Rabadash."

"Of course it is," said Hwin.  "Just what I was afraid of.  Quick!  We
must get to Anvard before it."  And without another word she whisked
round and began galloping north.  Bree tossed his head and did the same.

"Come on, Bree, come on," yelled Aravis over her shoulder.

This race was very gruelling for the Horses.  As they topped each ridge
they found another valley and another ridge beyond it; and though they
knew they were going in more or less the right direction, no one knew
how far it was to Anvard.  From the top of the second ridge Shasta
looked back again.  Instead of a dust-cloud well out in the desert he
now saw a black, moving mass, rather like ants, on the far bank of the
Winding Arrow.  They were doubtless looking for a ford.

"They're on the river!" he yelled wildly.

"Quick!  Quick!" shouted Aravis.  "We might as well not have come at
all if we don't reach Anvard in time.  Gallop, Bree, gallop.  Remember
you're a war-horse."

It was all Shasta could do to prevent himself from shouting out similar
instructions; but he thought, "The poor chap's doing all he can
already," and held his tongue.  And certainly both Horses were doing,
if not all they could, all they thought they could; which is not quite
the same thing.  Bree had caught up with Hwin and they thundered side
by side over the turf.  It didn't look as if Hwin could possibly keep
it up much longer.

At that moment everyone's feelings were completely altered by a sound
from behind.  It was not the sound they had been expecting to hear--the
noise of hoofs and jingling armour, mixed, perhaps, with Calormene
battle-cries.  Yet Shasta knew it at once.  It was the same snarling
roar he had heard that moonlit night when they first met Aravis and
Hwin.  Bree knew it too.  His eyes gleamed red and his ears lay flat
back on his skull.  And Bree now discovered that he had not really been
going as fast--not quite as fast--as he could.  Shasta felt the change
at once.  Now they were really going all out.  In a few seconds they
were well ahead of Hwin.

"It's not fair," thought Shasta.  "I _did_ think we'd be safe from
lions here!"

He looked over his shoulder.  Everything was only too clear.  A huge
tawny creature, its body low to the ground, like a cat streaking across
the lawn to a tree when a strange dog has got into the garden, was
behind them.  And it was nearer every second and half second.

He looked forward again and saw something which he did not take in, or
even think about.  Their way was barred by a smooth green wall about
ten feet high.  In the middle of that wall there was a gate, open.  In
the middle of the gateway stood a tall man dressed, down to his bare
feet, in a robe coloured like autumn leaves, leaning on a straight
staff.  His beard fell almost to his knees.

Shasta saw all this in a glance and looked back again.  The lion had
almost got Hwin now.  It was making snaps at her hind legs, and there
was no hope now in her foam-flecked, wide-eyed face.

"Stop," bellowed Shasta in Bree's ear.  "Must go back.  Must help!"

Bree always said afterwards that he never heard, or never understood
this; and as he was in general a very truthful horse we must accept his
word.

Shasta slipped his feet out of the stirrups, slid both his legs over on
the left side, hesitated for one hideous hundredth of a second, and
jumped.  It hurt horribly and nearly winded him; but before he knew how
it hurt him he was staggering back to help Aravis.  He had never done
anything like this in his life before and hardly knew why he was doing
it now.

One of the most terrible noises in the world, a horse's scream, broke
from Hwin's lips.  Aravis was stooping low over Hwin's neck and seemed
to be trying to draw her sword.  And now all three--Aravis, Hwin, and
the lion--were almost on top of Shasta.  Before they reached him the
lion rose on its hind legs, larger than you would have believed a lion
could be, and jabbed at Aravis with its right paw.  Shasta could see
all the terrible claws extended.  Aravis screamed and reeled in the
saddle.  The lion was tearing her shoulders.  Shasta, half mad with
horror, managed to lurch towards the brute.  He had no weapon, not even
a stick or a stone.  He shouted out, idiotically, at the lion as one
would at a dog.  "Go home!  Go home!"  For a fraction of a second he
was staring right into its wide-opened, raging mouth.  Then, to his
utter astonishment, the lion, still on its hind legs, checked itself
suddenly, turned head over heels, picked itself up, and rushed away.

Shasta did not for a moment suppose it had gone for good.  He turned
and raced for the gate in the green wall which, now for the first time,
he remembered seeing.  Hwin, stumbling and nearly fainting, was just
entering the gate: Aravis still kept her seat but her back was covered
with blood.

"Come in, my daughter, come in," the robed and bearded man was saying,
and then "Come in, my son" as Shasta panted up to him.  He heard the
gate closed behind him; and the bearded stranger was already helping
Aravis off her horse.

They were in a wide and perfectly circular enclosure, protected by a
high wall of green turf.  A pool of perfectly still water, so full that
the water was almost exactly level with the ground, lay before him.  At
one end of the pool, completely overshadowing it with its branches,
there grew the hugest and most beautiful tree that Shasta had ever
seen.  Beyond the pool was a little low house of stone roofed with deep
and ancient thatch.  There was a sound of bleating and over at the far
side of the enclosure there were some goats.  The level ground was
completely covered with the finest grass.

"Are--are--are you," panted Shasta.  "Are you King Lune of Archenland?"

The old man shook his head.  "No," he replied in a quiet voice, "I am
the Hermit of the Southern March.  And now, my son, waste no time on
questions, but obey.  This damsel is wounded.  Your horses are spent.
Rabadash is at this moment finding a ford over the Winding Arrow.  If
you run now, without a moment's rest, you will still be in time to warn
King Lune."

Shasta's heart fainted at these words for he felt he had no strength
left.  And he writhed inside at what seemed the cruelty and unfairness
of the demand.  He had not yet learned that if you do one good deed
your reward usually is to be set to do another and harder and better
one.  But all he said out loud was:

"Where is the King?"

The Hermit turned and pointed with his staff.  "Look," he said.  "There
is another gate, right opposite to the one you entered by.  Open it and
go straight ahead: always straight ahead, over level or steep, over
smooth or rough, over dry or wet.  I know by my art that you will find
King Lune straight ahead.  But run, run: always run."

Shasta nodded his head, ran to the northern gate and disappeared beyond
it.  Then the Hermit took Aravis, whom he had all this time been
supporting with his left arm, and half led, half carried her into the
house.  After a long time he came out again.

"Now, cousins," he said to the Horses.  "It is your turn."

Without waiting for an answer--and indeed they were too exhausted to
speak--he took the bridles and saddles off both of them.  Then he
rubbed them both down, so well that a groom in a king's stable could
not have done it better.

"There, cousins," he said, "dismiss it all from your minds and be
comforted.  Here is water and there is grass.  You shall have a hot
mash when I have milked my other cousins, the goats."

"Sir," said Hwin, finding her voice at last, "will the Tarkheena live?
Has the lion killed her?"

"I who know many present things by my art," replied the Hermit with a
smile, "have yet little knowledge of things future.  Therefore I do not
know whether any man or woman or beast in the whole world will be alive
when the sun sets to-night.  But be of good hope.  The damsel is likely
to live as long as any of her age."

When Aravis came to herself she found that she was lying on her face on
a low bed of extraordinary softness in a cool, bare room with walls of
undressed stone.  She couldn't understand why she had been laid on her
face; but when she tried to turn and felt the hot, burning pains all
over her back, she remembered, and realised why.  She couldn't
understand what delightfully springy stuff the bed was made of, because
it was made of heather (which is the best bedding) and heather was a
thing she had never seen or heard of.

The door opened and the Hermit entered, carrying a large wooden bowl in
his hand.  After carefully setting this down, he came to the bedside,
and asked:

"How do you find yourself, my daughter?"

"My back is very sore, father," said Aravis, "but there is nothing else
wrong with me."

He knelt beside her, laid his hand on her forehead, and felt her pulse.

"There is no fever," he said.  "You will do well.  Indeed there is no
reason why you should not get up to-morrow.  But now, drink this."

He fetched the wooden bowl and held it to her lips.  Aravis couldn't
help making a face when she tasted it, for goats' milk is rather a
shock when you are not used to it.  But she was very thirsty and
managed to drink it all and felt better when she had finished.

"Now, daughter, you may sleep when you wish," said the Hermit.  "For
your wounds are washed and dressed and though they smart they are no
more serious than if they had been the cuts of a whip.  It must have
been a very strange lion; for instead of catching you out of the saddle
and getting his teeth into you, he has only drawn his claws across your
back.  Ten scratches: sore, but not deep or dangerous."

"I say!" said Aravis.  "I _have_ had luck."

"Daughter," said the Hermit, "I have now lived a hundred and nine
winters in this world and have never yet met any such thing as Luck.
There is something about all this that I do not understand: but if ever
we need to know it, you may be sure that we shall."

"And what about Rabadash and his two hundred horse?" asked Aravis.

"They will not pass this way, I think," said the Hermit.  "They must
have found a ford by now well to the east of us.  From there they will
try to ride straight to Anvard."

"Poor Shasta!" said Aravis.  "Has he far to go?  Will he get there
first?"

"There is good hope of it," said the old man.

Aravis lay down again (on her side this time) and said, "Have I been
asleep for a long time?  It seems to be getting dark."

The Hermit was looking out of the only window, which faced north.
"This is not the darkness of night," he said presently.  "The clouds
are rolling down from Stormness Head.  Our foul weather always comes
from there in these parts.  There will be thick fog to-night."

Next day, except for her sore back, Aravis felt so well that after
breakfast (which was porridge and cream) the Hermit said she could get
up.  And of course she at once went out to speak to the Horses.  The
weather had changed and the whole of that green enclosure was filled,
like a great green cup, with sunlight.  It was a very peaceful place,
lonely and quiet.

Hwin at once trotted across to Aravis and gave her a horse-kiss.

"But where's Bree?" said Aravis when each had asked after the other's
health and sleep.

"Over there," said Hwin, pointing with her nose to the far side of the
circle.  "And I wish you'd come and talk to him.  There's something
wrong, I can't get a word out of him."

They strolled across and found Bree lying with his face towards the
wall, and though he must have heard them coming, he never turned his
head or spoke a word.

"Good morning, Bree," said Aravis.  "How are you this morning?"

Bree muttered something that no one could hear.

"The Hermit says that Shasta probably got to King Lune in time,"
continued Aravis, "so it looks as if all our troubles were over.
Narnia, at last, Bree!"

"I shall never see Narnia," said Bree in a low voice.

"Aren't you well, Bree dear?" said Aravis.

Bree turned round at last, his face mournful as only a horse's can be.

"I shall go back to Calormen," he said.

"What?" said Aravis.  "Back to slavery!"

"Yes," said Bree.  "Slavery is all I'm fit for.  How can I ever show my
face among the free Horses of Narnia?--I who left a mare and a girl and
a boy to be eaten by lions while I galloped all I could to save my own
wretched skin!"

"We all ran as hard as we could," said Hwin.

"Shasta didn't!" snorted Bree.  "At least he ran in the right
direction: ran _back_.  And that is what shames me most of all.  I, who
called myself a war-horse and boasted of a hundred fights, to be beaten
by a little human boy--a child, a mere foal, who had never held a sword
nor had any good nurture or example in his life!"

"I know," said Aravis.  "I felt just the same.  Shasta was marvellous.
I'm just as bad as you, Bree.  I've been snubbing him and looking down
on him ever since you met us and now he turns out to be the best of us
all.  But I think it would be better to stay and say we're sorry than
to go back to Calormen."

"It's all very well for you," said Bree.  "You haven't disgraced
yourself.  But I've lost everything."

"My good Horse," said the Hermit, who had approached them unnoticed
because his bare feet made so little noise on that sweet, dewy grass.
"My good Horse, you've lost nothing but your self-conceit.  No, no,
cousin.  Don't put back your ears and shake your mane at me.  If you
are really so humbled as you sounded a minute ago, you must learn to
listen to sense.  You're not quite the great horse you had come to
think, from living among poor dumb horses.  Of course you were braver
and cleverer than _them_.  You could hardly help being that.  It
doesn't follow that you'll be anyone very special in Narnia.  But as
long as you know you're nobody very special, you'll be a very decent
sort of Horse, on the whole, and taking one thing with another.  And
now, if you and my other four-footed cousin will come round to the
kitchen door we'll see about the other half of that mash."




_Chapter XI_

THE UNWELCOME FELLOW TRAVELLER

When Shasta went through the gate he found a slope of grass and a
little heather running up before him to some trees.  He had nothing to
think about now and no plans to make: he had only to run, and that was
quite enough.  His limbs were shaking, a terrible stitch was beginning
in his side, and the sweat that kept dropping into his eyes blinded
them and made them smart.  He was unsteady on his feet too, and more
than once he nearly turned his ankle on a loose stone.

The trees were thicker now than they had yet been and in the more open
spaces there was bracken.  The sun had gone in without making it any
cooler.  It had become one of those hot, grey days when there seem to
be twice as many flies as usual.  Shasta's face was covered with them;
he didn't even try to shake them off--he had too much else to do.

Suddenly he heard a horn--not a great throbbing horn like the horns of
Tashbaan but a merry call, Ti-ro-to-to-ho!  Next moment he came out
into a wide glade and found himself in a crowd of people.

At least, it looked a crowd to him.  In reality there were about
fifteen or twenty of them, all gentlemen in green hunting dress, with
their horses; some in the saddle and some standing by their horses'
heads.  In the centre someone was holding the stirrup for a man to
mount.  And the man he was holding it for was the jolliest, fat,
apple-cheeked, twinkling-eyed King you could imagine.

As soon as Shasta came in sight this King forgot all about mounting his
horse.  He spread out his arms to Shasta, his face lit up, and he cried
out in a great, deep voice that seemed to come from the bottom of his
chest.

"Corin!  My son!  And on foot, and in rags!  What----"

"No," panted Shasta, shaking his head.  "Not Prince Corin.  I--I--know
I'm like him... saw his Highness in Tashbaan ... sent his greetings."

The King was staring at Shasta with an extraordinary expression on his
face.

"Are you K-King Lune?" gasped Shasta.  And then, without waiting for an
answer, "Lord King--fly--Anvard--shut the gates--enemies upon
you--Rabadash and two hundred horse."

"Have you assurance of this, boy?" asked one of the other gentlemen.

"My own eyes," said Shasta.  "I've seen them.  Raced them all the way
from Tashbaan."

"On foot?" said the gentleman, raising his eyebrows a little.

"Horses--with the Hermit," said Shasta.

"Question him no more, Darrin," said King Lune.  "I see truth in his
face.  We must ride for it, gentlemen.  A spare horse there, for the
boy.  You can ride fast, friend?"

For answer Shasta put his foot in the stirrup of the horse which had
been led towards him and a moment later he was in the saddle.  He had
done it a hundred times with Bree in the last few weeks, and his
mounting was very different now from what it had been on that first
night when Bree had said that he climbed up a horse as if he were
climbing a haystack.

He was pleased to hear the Lord Darrin say to the King, "The boy has a
true horseman's seat, Sire.  I'll warrant there's noble blood in him."

"His blood, aye, there's the point," said the King.  And he stared hard
at Shasta again with that curious expression, almost a hungry
expression, in his steady, grey eyes.

But by now the whole party was moving off at a brisk canter.  Shasta's
seat was excellent but he was sadly puzzled what to do with his reins,
for he had never touched the reins while he was on Bree's back.  But he
looked very carefully out of the corners of his eyes to see what the
others were doing (as some of us have done at parties when we weren't
quite sure which knife or fork we were meant to use) and tried to get
his fingers right.  But he didn't dare to try really directing the
horse; he trusted it would follow the rest.  The horse was of course an
ordinary horse, not a Talking Horse; but it had quite wits enough to
realise that the strange boy on its back had no whip and no spurs and
was not really master of the situation.  That was why Shasta soon found
himself at the tail end of the procession.

Even so, he was going pretty fast.  There were no flies now and the air
in his face was delicious.  He had got his breath back too.  And his
errand had succeeded.  For the first time since the arrival at Tashbaan
(how long ago it seemed!) he was beginning to enjoy himself.

He looked up to see how much nearer the mountain tops had come.  To his
disappointment he could not see them at all: only a vague greyness,
rolling down towards them.  He had never been in mountain country
before and was surprised.  "It's a cloud," he said to himself, "a cloud
coming down.  I see.  Up here in the hills one is really in the sky.  I
shall see what the inside of a cloud is like.  What fun!  I've often
wondered."  Far away on his left, and a little behind him, the sun was
getting ready to set.

They had come to a rough kind of road by now and were making very good
speed.  But Shasta's horse was still the last of the lot.  Once or
twice when the road made a bend (there was now continuous forest on
each side of it) he lost sight of the others for a second or two.

Then they plunged into the fog, or else the fog rolled over them.  The
world became grey.  Shasta had not realised how cold and wet the inside
of a cloud would be; nor how dark.  The grey turned to black with
alarming speed.

Someone at the head of the column winded the horn every now and then,
and each time the sound came from a little further off.  He couldn't
see any of the others now, but of course he'd be able to as soon as he
got round the next bend.  But when he rounded it he still couldn't see
them.  In fact he could see nothing at all.  His horse was walking now.
"Get on, Horse, get on," said Shasta.  Then came the horn, very faint.
Bree had always told him that he must keep his heels well turned out,
and Shasta had got the idea that something very terrible would happen
if he dug his heels into a horse's sides.  This seemed to him an
occasion for trying it.  "Look here, Horse," he said, "if you don't
buck up, do you know what I'll do?  I'll dig my heels into you.  I
really will."  The horse, however, took no notice of this threat.  So
Shasta settled himself firmly in the saddle, gripped with his knees,
clenched his teeth, and punched both the horse's sides with his heels
as hard as he could.

The only result was that the horse broke into a kind of pretence of a
trot for five or six paces and then subsided into a walk again.  And
now it was quite dark and they seemed to have given up blowing that
horn.  The only sound was a steady drip-drip from the branches of the
trees.

"Well, I suppose even a walk will get us somewhere sometime," said
Shasta to himself.  "I only hope I shan't run into Rabadash and his
people."

He went on for what seemed a long time, always at a walking pace.  He
began to hate that horse, and he was also beginning to feel very hungry.

Presently he came to a place where the road divided into two.  He was
just wondering which led to Anvard when he was startled by a noise from
behind him.  It was the noise of trotting horses.  "Rabadash!" thought
Shasta.  He had no way of guessing which road Rabadash would take.
"But if I take one," said Shasta to himself, "he _may_ take the other:
and if I stay at the cross-roads I'm sure to be caught."  He dismounted
and led his horse as quickly as he could along the right-hand road.

The sound of the cavalry grew rapidly nearer and in a minute or two
Shasta realised that they were at the cross-roads.  He held his breath,
waiting to see which way they would take.

There came a low word of command "Halt!" then a moment of horsey
noises--nostrils blowing, hoofs pawing, bits being champed, necks being
patted.  Then a voice spoke.

"Attend, all of you," it said.  "We are now within a furlong of the
castle.  Remember your orders.  Once we are in Narnia, as we should be
by sunrise, you are to kill as little as possible.  On this venture you
are to regard every drop of Narnian blood as more precious than a
gallon of your own.  On _this_ venture, I say.  The gods will send us a
happier hour and then you must leave nothing alive between Cair Paravel
and the Western Waste.  But we are not yet in Narnia.  Here in
Archenland it is another thing.  In the assault on this castle of King
Lune's, nothing matters but speed.  Show your mettle.  It must be mine
within an hour.  And if it is, I give it all to you.  I reserve no
booty for myself.  Kill me every barbarian male within its walls, down
to the child that was born yesterday, and everything else is yours to
divide as you please--the women, the gold, the jewels, the weapons, and
the wine.  The man that I see hanging back when we come to the gates
shall be burned alive.  In the name of Tash the irresistible, the
inexorable--forward!"

With a great cloppitty-clop the column began to move, and Shasta
breathed again.  They had taken the other road.

Shasta thought they took a long time going past, for though he had been
talking and thinking about "two hundred horse" all day, he had not
realised how many they really were.  But at last the sound died away
and once more he was alone amid the drip-drip from the trees.

He now knew the way to Anvard but of course he could not now go there:
that would only mean running into the arms of Rabadash's troopers.
"What on earth am I to do?" said Shasta to himself.  But he remounted
his horse and continued along the road he had chosen, in the faint hope
of finding some cottage where he might ask for shelter and a meal.  He
had thought, of course, of going back to Aravis and Bree and Hwin at
the hermitage, but he couldn't because by now he had not the least idea
of the direction.

"After all," said Shasta, "this road is bound to get to somewhere."

But that all depends on what you mean by somewhere.  The road kept on
getting to somewhere in the sense that it got to more and more trees,
all dark and dripping and to colder and colder air.  And strange, icy
winds kept blowing the mist past him though they never blew it away.
If he had been used to mountain country he would have realised that
this meant he was now very high up--perhaps right at the top of the
pass.  But Shasta knew nothing about mountains.

"I _do_ think," said Shasta, "that I must be the most unfortunate boy
that ever lived in the whole world.  Everything goes right for everyone
except me.  Those Narnian lords and ladies got safe away from Tashbaan;
I was left behind.  Aravis and Bree and Hwin are all as snug as
anything with that old Hermit: of course I was the one who was sent on.
King Lune and his people must have got safely into the castle and shut
the gates long before Rabadash arrived, but I get left out."

And being very tired and having nothing inside him, he felt so sorry
for himself that the tears rolled down his cheeks.

What put a stop to all this was a sudden fright.  Shasta discovered
that someone or somebody was walking beside him.  It was pitch dark and
he could see nothing.  And the Thing (or Person) was going so quietly
that he could hardly hear any footfalls.  What he could hear was
breathing.  His invisible companion seemed to breathe on a very large
scale, and Shasta got the impression that it was a very large creature.
And he had come to notice this breathing so gradually that he had
really no idea how long it had been there.  It was a horrible shock.

It darted into his mind that he had heard long ago that there were
giants in these Northern countries.  He bit his lip in terror.  But now
that he really had something to cry about, he stopped crying.

The Thing (unless it was a Person) went on beside him so very quietly
that Shasta began to hope he had only imagined it.  But just as he was
becoming quite sure of it, there suddenly came a deep, rich sigh out of
the darkness beside him.  That couldn't be imagination!  Anyway, he had
felt the hot breath of that sigh on his chilly left hand.

If the horse had been any good--or if he had known how to get any good
out of the horse--he would have risked everything on a break away and a
wild gallop.  But he knew he couldn't make that horse gallop.  So he
went on at a walking pace and the unseen companion walked and breathed
beside him.  At last he could bear it no longer.

"Who are you?" he said, scarcely above a whisper.

"One who has waited long for you to speak," said the Thing.  Its voice
was not loud, but very large and deep.

"Are you--are you a giant?" asked Shasta.

"You might call me a giant," said the Large Voice.  "But I am not like
the creatures you call giants."

"I can't see you at all," said Shasta, after staring very hard.  Then
(for an even more terrible idea had come into his head) he said, almost
in a scream, "You're not--not something _dead_, are you?  Oh
please--please do go away.  What harm have I ever done you?  Oh, I am
the unluckiest person in the whole world?"

Once more he felt the warm breath of the Thing on his hand and face.
"There," it said, "that is not the breath of a ghost.  Tell me your
sorrows."

Shasta was a little reassured by the breath: so he told how he had
never known his real father or mother and had been brought up sternly
by the fisherman.  And then he told the story of his escape and how
they were chased by lions and forced to swim for their lives; and of
all their dangers in Tashbaan and about his night among the Tombs and
how the beasts howled at him out of the desert.  And he told about the
heat and thirst of their desert journey and how they were almost at
their goal when another lion chased them and wounded Aravis.  And also,
how very long it was since he had had anything to eat.

"I do not call you unfortunate," said the Large Voice.

"Don't you think it was bad luck to meet so many lions?" said Shasta.

"There was only one lion," said the Voice.

"What on earth do you mean?  I've just told you there were at least two
the first night, and----"

"There was only one: but he was swift of foot."

"How do you know?"

"I was the lion."  And as Shasta gaped with open mouth and said
nothing, the Voice continued.  "I was the lion who forced you to join
with Aravis.  I was the cat who comforted you among the houses of the
dead.  I was the lion who drove the jackals from you while you slept.
I was the lion who gave the Horses the new strength of fear for the
last mile so that you should reach King Lune in time.  And I was the
lion you do not remember who pushed the boat in which you lay, a child
near death, so that it came to shore where a man sat, wakeful at
midnight, to receive you."

"Then it was you who wounded Aravis?"

"It was I."

"But what for?"

"Child," said the Voice, "I am telling you your story, not hers.  I
tell no-one any story but his own."

"Who are you?" asked Shasta.

"Myself," said the Voice, very deep and low so that the earth shook:
and again "Myself," loud and clear and gay: and then the third time
"Myself," whispered so softly you could hardly hear it, and yet it
seemed to come from all round you as if the leaves rustled with it.

Shasta was no longer afraid that the Voice belonged to something that
would eat him, nor that it was the voice of a ghost.  But a new and
different sort of trembling came over him.  Yet he felt glad too.

The mist was turning from black to grey and from grey to white.  This
must have begun to happen some time ago, but while he had been talking
to the Thing he had not been noticing anything else.  Now, the
whiteness around him became a shining whiteness; his eyes began to
blink.  Somewhere ahead he could hear birds singing.  He knew the night
was over at last.  He could see the mane and ears and head of his horse
quite easily now.  A golden light fell on them from the left.  He
thought it was the sun.

He turned and saw, pacing beside him, taller than the horse, a Lion.
The horse did not seem to be afraid of it or else could not see it.  It
was from the Lion that the light came.  No-one ever saw anything more
terrible or beautiful.

Luckily Shasta had lived all his life too far south in Calormen to have
heard the tales that were whispered in Tashbaan about a dreadful
Narnian demon that appeared in the form of a lion.  And of course he
knew none of the true stories about Aslan, the great Lion, the son of
the Emperor-over-sea, the King above all High Kings in Narnia.  But
after one glance at the Lion's face he slipped out of the saddle and
fell at its feet.  He couldn't say anything but then he didn't want to
say anything, and he knew he needn't say anything.

The High King above all kings stooped towards him.  Its mane, and some
strange and solemn perfume that hung about the mane, was all round him.
It touched his forehead with its tongue.  He lifted his face and their
eyes met.  Then instantly the pale brightness of the mist and the fiery
brightness of the Lion rolled themselves together into a swirling glory
and gathered themselves up and disappeared.  He was alone with the
horse on a grassy hillside under a blue sky.  And there were birds
singing.




_Chapter XII_

SHASTA IN NARNIA

"Was it all a dream?" wondered Shasta.  But it couldn't have been a
dream for there in the grass before him he saw the deep, large print of
the Lion's front right paw.  It took one's breath away to think of the
weight that could make a footprint like that.  But there was something
more remarkable than the size about it.  As he looked at it, water had
already filled the bottom of it.  Soon it was full to the brim, and
then overflowing, and a little stream was running downhill, past him,
over the grass.

Shasta stooped and drank--a very long drink--and then dipped his face
in and splashed his head.  It was extremely cold, and clear as glass,
and refreshed him very much.  After that he stood up, shaking the water
out of his ears and flinging the wet hair back from his forehead, and
began to take stock of his surroundings.

Apparently it was still very early morning.  The sun had only just
risen, and it had risen out of the forests which he saw low down and
far away on his right.  The country which he was looking at was
absolutely new to him.  It was a green valley-land dotted with trees
through which he caught the gleam of a river that wound away roughly to
the north-west.  On the far side of the valley there were high and even
rocky hills, but they were lower than the mountains he had seen
yesterday.  Then he began to guess where he was.  He turned and looked
behind him and saw that the slope on which he was standing belonged to
a range of far higher mountains.

"I see," said Shasta to himself.  "Those are the big mountains between
Archenland and Narnia.  I was on the other side of them yesterday.  I
must have come through the pass in the night.  What luck that I hit
it!--at least it wasn't luck at all really, it was _Him_.  And now I'm
in Narnia."

He turned and unsaddled his horse and took off its bridle--"Though you
_are_ a perfectly horrid horse," he said.  It took no notice of this
remark and immediately began eating grass.  That horse had a very low
opinion of Shasta.

"I wish I could eat grass!" thought Shasta.  "It's no good going back
to Anvard, it'll all be besieged.  I'd better get lower down into the
valley and see if I can get anything to eat."

So he went on downhill (the thick dew was cruelly cold to his bare
feet) till he came into a wood.  There was a kind of track running
through it and he had not followed this for many minutes when he heard
a thick and rather wheezy voice saying to him,

"Good morning, neighbour."

Shasta looked round eagerly to find the speaker and presently saw a
small, prickly person with a dark face who had just come out from among
the trees.  At least, it was small for a person but very big indeed for
a hedgehog, which was what it was.

"Good morning," said Shasta.  "But I'm not a neighbour.  In fact I'm a
stranger in these parts."

"Ah?" said the Hedgehog inquiringly.

"I've come over the mountains--from Archenland, you know."

"Ah, Archenland," said the Hedgehog.  "That's a terrible long way.
Never been there myself."

"And I think, perhaps," said Shasta, "someone ought to be told that
there's an army of savage Calormenes attacking Anvard at this very
moment."

"You don't say so!" answered the Hedgehog.  "Well, think of that.  And
they do say that Calormen is hundreds and thousands of miles away,
right at the world's end, across a great sea of sand."

"It's not nearly as far as you think," said Shasta.  "And oughtn't
something to be done about this attack on Anvard.  Oughtn't your High
King to be told?"

"Certain sure, something ought to be done about it," said the Hedgehog.
"But you see I'm just on my way to bed for a good day's sleep.  Hullo,
neighbour!"

The last words were addressed to an immense biscuit-coloured rabbit
whose head had just popped up from somewhere beside the path.  The
Hedgehog immediately told the Rabbit what it had just learned from
Shasta.  The Rabbit agreed that this was very remarkable news and that
somebody ought to tell someone about it with a view to doing something.

And so it went on.  Every few minutes they were joined by other
creatures, some from the branches overhead and some from little
underground houses at their feet, till the party consisted of five
rabbits, a squirrel, two magpies, a goat-foot faun, and a mouse, who
all talked at the same time and all agreed with the Hedgehog.  For the
truth was that in that golden age when the Witch and the Winter had
gone and Peter the High King ruled at Cair Paravel, the smaller
woodland people of Narnia were so safe and happy that they were getting
a little careless.

Presently, however, two more practical people arrived in the little
wood.  One was a Red Dwarf whose name appeared to be Duffle.  The other
was a stag, a beautiful lordly creature with wide liquid eyes, dappled
flanks and legs so thin and graceful that they looked as if you could
break them with two fingers.

"Lion alive!" roared the Dwarf as soon as he had heard the news.  "And
if that's so, why are we all standing still, chattering?  Enemies at
Anvard!  News must be sent to Cair Paravel at once.  The army must be
called out.  Narnia must go to the aid of King Lune."

"Ah!" said the Hedgehog.  "But you won't find the High King at the
Cair.  He's away to the North trouncing those giants.  And talking of
giants, neighbours, that puts me in mind--

"Who'll take our message?" interrupted the Dwarf.  "Anyone here got
more speed than me?"

"I've got speed," said the Stag.  "What's my message?  How many
Calormenes?"

"Two hundred: under Prince Rabadash.  And----"

But the Stag was already away--all four legs off the ground at once,
and in a moment its white stern had disappeared among the remoter trees.

"Wonder where he's going," said a Rabbit.  "He won't find the High King
at Cair Paravel, you know."

"He'll find Queen Lucy," said Duffle.  "And then--hullo!  What's wrong
with the Human?  It looks pretty green.  Why, I do believe it's quite
faint.  Perhaps it's mortal hungry.  When did you last have a meal,
youngster?"

"Yesterday morning," said Shasta weakly.

"Come on, then, come on," said the Dwarf, at once throwing his thick
little arms round Shasta's waist to support him.  "Why, neighbours, we
ought all to be ashamed of ourselves!  You come with me, lad.
Breakfast! better than talking."

With a great deal of bustle, muttering reproaches to itself, the Dwarf
half led and half supported Shasta at a great speed further into the
wood and a little downhill.  It was a longer walk than Shasta wanted at
that moment and his legs had begun to feel very shaky before they came
out from the trees onto bare hillside.  There they found a little house
with a smoking chimney and an open door, and as they came to the
doorway Duffle called out,

"Hey, brothers!  A visitor for breakfast."

And immediately, mixed with a sizzling sound, there came to Shasta a
simply delightful smell.  It was one he had never smelled in his life
before, but I hope you have.  It was, in fact, the smell of bacon and
eggs and mushrooms all frying in a pan.

"Mind your head, lad," said Duffle a moment too late, for Shasta had
already bashed his forehead against the low lintel of the door.  "Now,"
continued the Dwarf, "sit you down.  The table's a bit low for you, but
then the stool's low too.  That's right.  And here's porridge--and
here's a jug of cream--and here's a spoon."

By the time Shasta had finished his porridge, the Dwarf's two brothers
(whose names were Rogin and Bricklethumb) were putting the dish of
bacon and eggs and mushrooms, and the coffee pot and the hot milk, and
the toast, on the table.

It was all new and wonderful to Shasta for Calormene food is quite
different.  He didn't even know what the slices of brown stuff were,
for he had never seen toast before.  He didn't know what the yellow
soft thing they smeared on the toast was, because in Calormen you
nearly always get oil instead of butter.  And the house itself was
quite different from the dark, frowsty, fish-smelling hut of Arsheesh
and from the pillared and carpeted halls in the palaces of Tashbaan.
The roof was very low, and everything was made of wood and there was a
cuckoo-clock and a red-and-white checked table-cloth and a bowl of wild
flowers and little white curtains on the thick-paned windows.  It was
also rather troublesome having to use dwarf cups and plates and knives
and forks.  This meant that helpings were very small, but then there
were a great many helpings, so that Shasta's plate or cup was being
filled every moment, and every moment the Dwarfs themselves were
saying, "Butter please," or "Another cup of coffee," or "I'd like a few
more mushrooms," or "What about frying another egg or so?"  And when at
last they had all eaten as much as they possibly could the three Dwarfs
drew lots for who would do the washing-up, and Rogin was the unlucky
one.  Then Duffle and Bricklethumb took Shasta outside to a bench which
ran against the cottage wall, and they all stretched out their legs and
gave a great sigh of contentment and the two Dwarfs lit their pipes.
The dew was off the grass now and the sun was warm; indeed, if there
hadn't been a light breeze, it would have been too hot.

"Now, Stranger," said Duffle, "I'll show you the lie of the land.  You
can see nearly all South Narnia from here, and we're rather proud of
the view.  Right away on your left, beyond those near hills, you can
just see the Western Mountains.  And that round hill away on your right
is called the Hill of the Stone Table.  Just beyond----"

But at that moment he was interrupted by a snore from Shasta who, what
with his night's journey and his excellent breakfast, had gone fast
asleep.  The kindly Dwarfs, as soon as they noticed this, began making
signs to each other not to wake him, and indeed did so much whispering
and nodding and getting up and tiptoeing away that they certainly would
have waked him if he had been less tired.

He slept pretty well nearly all day but woke up in time for supper.
The beds in that house were all too small for him but they made him a
fine bed of heather on the floor, and he never stirred nor dreamed all
night.  Next morning they had just finished breakfast when they heard a
shrill, exciting sound from outside.

"Trumpets!" said all the Dwarfs, as they and Shasta all came running
out.

The trumpets sounded again: a new noise to Shasta, not huge and solemn
like the horns of Tashbaan nor gay and merry like King Lune's hunting
horn, but clear and sharp and valiant.  The noise was coming from the
woods to the East, and soon there was a noise of horse-hoofs mixed with
it.  A moment later the head of the column came into sight.

First came the Lord Peridan on a bay horse carrying the great banner of
Narnia---a red lion on a green ground.  Shasta knew him at once.  Then
came three people riding abreast, two on great chargers and one on a
pony.  The two on the chargers were King Edmund and a fair-haired lady
with a very merry face who wore a helmet and mail shirt and carried a
bow across her shoulder and a quiver full of arrows at her side.  ("The
Queen Lucy," whispered Duffle.)  But the one on the pony was Corin.
After that came the main body of the army: men on ordinary horses, men
on Talking Horses (who didn't mind being ridden on proper occasions, as
when Narnia went to war), centaurs, stern, hard-bitten bears, great
Talking Dogs, and last of all six giants.  For there are good giants in
Narnia.  But though he knew they were on the right side Shasta at first
could hardly bear to look at them; there are some things that take a
lot of getting used to.

Just as the King and Queen reached the cottage and the Dwarfs began
making low bows to them, King Edmund called out,

"Now, friends!  Time for a halt and a morsel!" and at once there was a
great bustle of people dismounting and haversacks being opened and
conversation beginning when Corin came running up to Shasta and seized
both his hands and cried,

"What!  _You_ here!  So you got through all right?  I am glad.  Now we
shall have some sport.  And isn't it luck!  We only got into harbour at
Cair Paravel yesterday morning and the very first person who met us was
Chervy the Stag with all this news of an attack on Anvard.  Don't you
think--

"Who is your Highness's friend?" said King Edmund who had just got off
his horse.

"Don't you see, Sire?" said Corin.  "It's my double: the boy you
mistook me for at Tashbaan."

"Why, so he is your double," exclaimed Queen Lucy.  "As like as two
twins.  This is a marvellous thing."

"Please, your Majesty," said Shasta to King Edmund, "I was no traitor,
really I wasn't.  And I couldn't help hearing your plans.  But I'd
never have dreamed of telling them to your enemies."

"I know now that you were no traitor, boy," said King Edmund, laying
his hand on Shasta's head.  "But if you would not be taken for one,
another time try not to hear what's meant for other ears.  But all's
well."

After that there was so much bustle and talk and coming and going that
Shasta for a few minutes lost sight of Corin and Edmund and Lucy.  But
Corin was the sort of boy whom one is sure to hear of pretty soon and
it wasn't very long before Shasta heard King Edmund saying in a loud
voice:

"By the Lion's Mane, prince, this is too much!  Will your Highness
never be better?  You are more of a heart's-scald than our whole army
together!  I'd as lief have a regiment of hornets in my command as you."

Shasta wormed his way through the crowd and there saw Edmund, looking
very angry indeed, Corin looking a little ashamed of himself, and a
strange Dwarf sitting on the ground making faces.  A couple of fauns
had apparently just been helping it out of its armour.

"If I had but my cordial with me," Queen Lucy was saying, "I could soon
mend this.  But the High King has so strictly charged me not to carry
it commonly to the wars and to keep it only for great extremities!"

What had happened was this.  As soon as Corin had spoken to Shasta,
Corin's elbow had been plucked by a Dwarf in the army called Thornbut.

"What is it, Thornbut?" Corin had said.

"Your Royal Highness," said Thornbut, drawing him aside, "our march
to-day will bring us through the pass and right to your royal father's
castle.  We may be in battle before night."

"I know," said Corin.  "Isn't it splendid!"

"Splendid or not," said Thornbut, "I have the strictest orders from
King Edmund to see to it that your Highness is not in the fight.  You
will be allowed to see it, and that's treat enough for your Highness's
little years."

"Oh what nonsense!" Corin burst out.  "Of course I'm going to fight.
Why, the Queen Lucy's going to be with the archers."

"The Queen's grace will do as she pleases," said Thornbut.  "But you
are in my charge.  Either I must have your solemn and princely word
that you'll keep your pony beside mine--not half a neck ahead--till I
give your Highness leave to depart: or else--it is his Majesty's
word--we must go with our wrists tied together like two prisoners."

"I'll knock you down if you try to bind me," said Corin.

"I'd like to see your Highness do it," said the Dwarf.

That was quite enough for a boy like Corin and in a second he and the
Dwarf were at it hammer and tongs.  It would have been an even match
for, though Corin had longer arms and more height, the Dwarf was older
and tougher.  But it was never fought out (that's the worst of fights
on a rough hillside) for by very bad luck Thornbut trod on a loose
stone, came flat down on his nose, and found when he tried to get up
that he had sprained his ankle: a real excruciating sprain which would
keep him from walking or riding for at least a fortnight.

"See what your Highness has done," said King Edmund.  "Deprived us of a
proved warrior on the very edge of battle."

"I'll take his place, Sire," said Corin.

"Pshaw," said Edmund.  "No-one doubts your courage.  But a boy in
battle is a danger only to his own side."

At that moment the King was called away to attend to something else,
and Corin, after apologising handsomely to the Dwarf, rushed up to
Shasta and whispered,

"Quick.  There's a spare pony now, and the Dwarf's armour.  Put it on
before anyone notices."

"What for?" said Shasta.

"Why, so that you and I can fight in the battle of course!  Don't you
want to?"

"Oh--ah, yes, of course," said Shasta.  But he hadn't been thinking of
doing so at all, and began to get a most uncomfortable prickly feeling
in his spine.

"That's right," said Corin.  "Over your head.  Now the sword-belt.  But
we must ride near the tail of the column and keep as quiet as mice.
Once the battle begins every one will be far too busy to notice us."




_Chapter XIII_

THE FIGHT AT ANVARD

By about eleven o'clock the whole company was once more on the march,
riding westward with the mountains on their left.  Corin and Shasta
rode right at the rear with the Giants immediately in front of them.
Lucy and Edmund and Peridan were busy with their plans for the battle
and though Lucy once said, "But where is his goosecap Highness?" Edmund
only replied, "Not in the front, and that's good news enough.  Leave
well alone."

Shasta told Corin most of his adventures and explained that he had
learned all his riding from a horse and didn't really know how to use
the reins.  Corin instructed him in this, besides telling him all about
their secret sailing from Tashbaan.

"And where is the Queen Susan?"

"At Cair Paravel," said Corin.  "She's not like Lucy, you know, who's
as good as a man, or at any rate as good as a boy.  Queen Susan is more
like an ordinary grown-up lady.  She doesn't ride to the wars, though
she is an excellent archer."

The hillside path which they were following became narrower all the
time and the drop on their right hand became steeper.  At last they
were going in single file along the edge of a precipice and Shasta
shuddered to think that he had done the same last night without knowing
it.  "But of course," he thought, "I was quite safe.  That is why the
Lion kept on my left.  He was between me and the edge all the time."

Then the path went left and south away from the cliff and there were
thick woods on both sides of it and they went steeply up and up into
the pass.  There would have been a splendid view from the top if it
were open ground but among all those trees you could see nothing--only,
every now and then, some huge pinnacle of rock above the tree-tops, and
an eagle or two wheeling high up in the blue air.

"They smell battle," said Corin, pointing at the birds.  "They know
we're preparing a feed for them."

Shasta didn't like this at all.

When they had crossed the neck of the pass and come a good deal lower
they reached more open ground and from here Shasta could see all
Archenland, blue and hazy, spread out below him and even (he thought) a
hint of the desert beyond it.  But the sun, which had perhaps two hours
or so to go before it set, was in his eyes and he couldn't make things
out distinctly.

Here the army halted and spread out in a line, and there was a great
deal of rearranging.  A whole detachment of very dangerous-looking
Talking Beasts whom Shasta had not noticed before and who were mostly
of the cat kind (leopards, panthers, and the like) went padding and
growling to take up their positions on the left.  The giants were
ordered to the right, and before going there they all took off
something they had been carrying on their backs and sat down for a
moment.  Then Shasta saw that what they had been carrying and were now
putting on were pairs of boots: horrid, heavy, spiked boots which came
up to their knees.  Then they sloped their huge clubs over their
shoulders and marched to their battle position.  The archers, with
Queen Lucy, fell to the rear and you could first see them bending their
bows and then hear the twang-twang as they tested the strings.  And
wherever you looked you could see people tightening girths, putting on
helmets, drawing swords, and throwing cloaks to the ground.  There was
hardly any talking now.  It was very solemn and very dreadful.  "I'm in
for it now--I really am in for it now," thought Shasta.

Then there came noises far ahead: the sound of many men shouting and a
steady thud-thud-thud.

"Battering ram," whispered Corin.  "They're battering the gate."

Even Corin looked quite serious now.

"Why doesn't King Edmund get on?" he said.  "I can't stand this waiting
about.  Chilly too."

Shasta nodded: hoping he didn't look as frightened as he felt.

The trumpet at last!  On the move now--now trotting--the banner
streaming out in the wind.  They had topped a low ridge now, and below
them the whole scene suddenly opened out; a little, many-towered castle
with its gate towards them.  No moat, unfortunately, but of course the
gate shut and the portcullis down.  On the walls they could see, like
little white dots, the faces of the defenders.  Down below, about fifty
of the Calormenes, dismounted, were steadily swinging a great tree
trunk against the gate.  But at once the scene changed.  The main bulk
of Rabadash's men had been on foot ready to assault the gate.  But now
he had seen the Narnians sweeping down from the ridge.  There is no
doubt those Calormenes are wonderfully trained.  It seemed to Shasta
only a second before a whole line of the enemy were on horseback again,
wheeling round to meet them, swinging towards them.

And now a gallop.  The ground between the two armies grew less every
moment.  Faster, faster.  All swords out now, all shields up to the
nose, all prayers said, all teeth clenched.  Shasta was dreadfully
frightened.  But it suddenly came into his head "If you funk this,
you'll funk every battle all your life.  Now or never."

But when at last the two lines met he had really very little idea of
what happened.  There was a frightful confusion and an appalling noise.
His sword was knocked clean out of his hand pretty soon.  And he'd got
the reins tangled somehow.  Then he found himself slipping.  Then a
spear came straight at him and as he ducked to avoid it he rolled right
off his horse, bashed his left knuckles terribly against someone else's
armour, and then----

But it is no use trying to describe the battle from Shasta's point of
view; he understood too little of the fight in general and even of his
own part in it.  The best way I can tell you what really happened is to
take you some miles away to where the Hermit of the Southern March sat
gazing into the smooth pool beneath the spreading tree, with Bree and
Hwin and Aravis beside him.

For it was in this pool that the Hermit looked when he wanted to know
what was going on in the world outside the green walls of his
hermitage.  There, as in a mirror, he could see, at certain times, what
was going on in the streets of cities far further south than Tashbaan,
or what ships were putting into Redhaven in the remote Seven Isles, or
what robbers or wild beasts stirred in the great Western forests
between Lantern Waste and Telmar.  And all this day he had hardly left
his pool, even to eat or drink, for he knew that great events were on
foot in Archenland.  Aravis and the Horses gazed into it too.  They
could see it was a magic pool: instead of reflecting the tree and the
sky it revealed cloudy and coloured shapes moving, always moving, in
its depths.  But they could see nothing clearly.  The Hermit could and
from time to time he told them what he saw.  A little while before
Shasta rode into his first battle, the Hermit had begun speaking like
this:

"I see one--two--three eagles wheeling in the gap by Stormness Head.
One is the oldest of all the eagles.  He would not be out unless battle
was at hand.  I see him wheel to and fro, peering down sometimes at
Anvard and sometimes to the east, behind Stormness.  Ah--I see now what
Rabadash and his men have been so busy at all day.  They have felled
and lopped a great tree and they are now coming out of the woods
carrying it as a ram.  They have learned something from the failure of
last night's assault.  He would have been wiser if he had set his men
to making ladders: but it takes longer and he is impatient.  Fool that
he is! he ought to have ridden back to Tashbaan as soon as the first
attack failed, for his whole plan depended on speed and surprise.  Now
they are bringing their ram into position.  King Lune's men are
shooting hard from the walls.  Five Calormenes have fallen: but not
many will.  They have their shields above their heads.  Rabadash is
giving his orders now.  With him are his most trusted lords, fierce
Tarkaans from the eastern provinces.  I can see their faces.  There is
Corradin of Castle Tormunt, and Azrooh, and Chlamash, and Ilgamuth of
the twisted lip, and a tall Tarkaan with a crimson beard----"

"By the Mane, my old master Anradin!" said Bree.

"S-s-sh," said Aravis.

"Now the ram has started.  If I could hear as well as see, what a noise
that would make!  Stroke after stroke: and no gate can stand it for
ever.  But wait!  Something up by Stormness has scared the birds.
They're coming out in masses.  And wait again ... I can't see yet ...
ah!  Now I can.  The whole ridge, up on the east, is black with
horsemen.  If only the wind would catch that standard and spread it
out.  They're over the ridge now, whoever they are.  Aha!  I've seen
the banner now.  Narnia, Narnia!  It's the red lion.  They're in full
career down the hill now.  I can see King Edmund.  There's a woman
behind among the archers.  Oh!----"

"What is it?" asked Hwin breathlessly.

"All his Cats are dashing out from the left of the line."

"Cats?" said Aravis.

"Great cats, leopards and such," said the Hermit impatiently.  "I see,
I see.  The Cats are coming round in a circle to get at the horses of
the dismounted men.  A good stroke.  The Calormene horses are mad with
terror already.  Now the Cats are in among them.  But Rabadash has
reformed his line and has a hundred men in the saddle.  They're riding
to meet the Narnians.  There's only a hundred yards between the two
lines now.  Only fifty.  I can see King Edmund, I can see the Lord
Peridan.  There are two mere children in the Narnian line.  What can
the King be about to let them into the battle?  Only ten yards--the
lines have met.  The Giants on the Narnian right are doing wonders ...
but one's down ... shot through the eye, I suppose.  The centre's all
in a muddle.  I can see more on the left.  There are the two boys
again.  Lion alive! one is Prince Corin.  The other, like him as two
peas.  It's your little Shasta.  Corin is fighting like a man.  He's
killed a Calormene.  I can see a bit of the centre now.  Rabadash and
Edmund almost met then, but the press has separated them----"

"What about Shasta?" said Aravis.

"Oh the fool!" groaned the Hermit.  "Poor, brave little fool.  He knows
nothing about this work.  He's making no use at all of his shield.  His
whole side's exposed.  He hasn't the faintest idea what to do with his
sword.  Oh, he's remembered it now.  He's waving it wildly about ...
nearly cut his own pony's head off, and he will in a moment if he's not
careful.  It's been knocked out of his hand now.  It's mere murder
sending a child into the battle; he can't live five minutes.  Duck, you
fool--oh, he's down."

"Killed?" asked three voices breathlessly.

"How can I tell?" said the Hermit.  "The Cats have done their work.
All the riderless horses are dead or escaped now: no retreat for the
Calormenes on them.  Now the Cats are turning back into the main
battle.  They're leaping on the rams-men.  The ram is down.  Oh, good!
good!  The gates are opening from the inside: there's going to be a
sortie.  The first three are out.  It's King Lune in the middle: the
brothers Dar and Darrin on each side of him.  Behind them are Tran and
Shar and Cole with his brother Colin.  There are ten--twenty--nearly
thirty of them out by now.  The Calormene line is being forced back
upon them.  King Edmund is dealing marvellous strokes.  He's just
slashed Corradin's head off.  Lots of Calormenes have thrown down their
arms and are running for the woods.  Those that remain are hard
pressed.  The Giants are closing in on the right--Cats on the
left--King Lune from their rear.  The Calormenes are a little knot now,
fighting back to back.  Your Tarkaan's down, Bree.  Lune and Azrooh are
fighting hand to hand; the King looks like winning--the King is keeping
it up well--the King has won.  Azrooh's down.  King Edmund's down--no,
he's up again: he's at it with Rabadash.  They're fighting in the very
gate of the castle.  Several Calormenes have surrendered.  Darrin has
killed Ilgamuth.  I can't see what's happened to Rabadash.  I think
he's dead, leaning against the castle wall, but I don't know.  Chlamash
and King Edmund are still fighting but the battle is over everywhere
else.  Chlamash has surrendered.  The battle is over.  The Calormenes
are utterly defeated."

When Shasta fell off his horse he gave himself up for lost.  But
horses, even in a battle, tread on human beings very much less than you
would suppose.  After a very horrible ten minutes or so Shasta realised
suddenly that there were no longer any horses stamping about in the
immediate neighbourhood and that the noise (for there were still a good
many noises going on) was no longer that of a battle.  He sat up and
stared about him.  Even he, little as he knew of battles, could soon
see that the Archenlanders and Narnians had won.  The only living
Calormenes he could see were prisoners, the castle gates were wide
open, and King Lune and King Edmund were shaking hands across the
battering ram.  From the circle of lords and warriors around them there
arose a sound of breathless and excited, but obviously cheerful,
conversation.  And then, suddenly, it all united and swelled into a
great roar of laughter.

Shasta picked himself up, feeling uncommonly stiff, and ran towards the
sound to see what the joke was.  A very curious sight met his eyes.
The unfortunate Rabadash appeared to be suspended from the castle
walls.  His feet, which were about two feet from the ground, were
kicking wildly.  His chain-shirt was somehow hitched up so that it was
horribly tight under the arms and came half way over his face.  In fact
he looked just as a man looks if you catch him in the very act of
getting into a stiff shirt that is a little too small for him.  As far
as could be made out afterwards (and you may be sure the story was well
talked over for many a day) what had happened was something like this.
Early in the battle one of the Giants had made an unsuccessful stamp at
Rabadash with his spiked boot: unsuccessful because it didn't crush
Rabadash, which was what the Giant had intended, but not quite useless
because one of the spikes tore the chain mail, just as you or I might
tear an ordinary shirt.  So Rabadash, by the time he encountered Edmund
at the gate, had a hole in the back of his hauberk.  And when Edmund
pressed him back nearer and nearer to the wall, he jumped up on a
mounting block and stood there raining down blows on Edmund from above.
But then, finding that this position, by raising him above the heads of
everyone else, made him a mark for every arrow from the Narnian bows,
he decided to jump down again.  And he meant to look and sound--no
doubt for a moment he _did_ look and sound--very grand and very
dreadful as he jumped, crying, "The bolt of Tash falls from above."
But he had to jump sideways because the crowd in front of him left him
no landing place in that direction.  And then, in the neatest way you
could wish, the tear in the back of his hauberk caught on a hook in the
wall.  (Ages ago this hook had had a ring in it for tying horses to.)
And there he found himself, like a piece of washing hung up to dry,
with everyone laughing at him.

"Let me down, Edmund," howled Rabadash.  "Let me down and fight me like
a king and a man; or if you are too great a coward to do that, kill me
at once."

"Certainly," began King Edmund, but King Lune interrupted.

"By your Majesty's good leave," said King Lune to Edmund.  "Not so."
Then, turning to Rabadash he said, "Your royal Highness, if you had
given that challenge a week ago, I'll answer for it there was no-one in
King Edmund's dominion, from the High King down to the smallest Talking
Mouse, who would have refused it.  But by attacking our castle of
Anvard in time of peace without defiance sent, you have proved yourself
no knight, but a traitor, and one rather to be whipped by the hangman
than to be suffered to cross swords with any person of honour.  Take
him down, bind him, and carry him within till our pleasure is further
known."

Strong hands wrenched Rabadash's sword from him and he was carried away
into the castle, shouting, threatening, cursing, and even crying.  For
though he could have faced torture he couldn't bear being made
ridiculous.  In Tashbaan every one had always taken him seriously.

At that moment Corin ran up to Shasta, seized his hand and started
dragging him towards King Lune.  "Here he is, Father, here he is,"
cried Corin.

"Aye, and here _thou_ art, at last," said the King in a very gruff
voice.  "And hast been in the battle, clean contrary to your obedience.
A boy to break a father's heart!  At your age a rod to your breech were
fitter than a sword in your fist, ha!"  But everyone, including Corin,
could see that the King was very proud of him.

"Chide him no more, Sire, if it please you," said Lord Darrin.  "His
Highness would not be your son if he did not inherit your conditions.
It would grieve your Majesty more if he had to be reproved for the
opposite fault."

"Well, well," grumbled the King.  "We'll pass it over for this time.
And now----"

What came next surprised Shasta as much as anything that had ever
happened to him in his life.  He found himself suddenly embraced in a
bear-like hug by King Lune and kissed on both cheeks.  Then the King
set him down again and said, "Stand here together, boys, and let all
the court see you.  Hold up your heads.  Now, gentlemen, look on them
both.  Has any man any doubts?"

And still Shasta could not understand why everyone stared at him and at
Corin nor what all the cheering was about.




_Chapter XIV_

HOW BREE BECAME A WISER HORSE

We must now return to Aravis and the Horses.  The Hermit, watching his
pool, was able to tell them that Shasta was not killed or even
seriously wounded, for he saw him get up and saw how affectionately he
was greeted by King Lune.  But as he could only see, not hear, he did
not know what anyone was saying and, once the fighting had stopped and
the talking had begun, it was not worth while looking in the pool any
longer.

Next morning, while the Hermit was indoors, the three of them discussed
what they should do next.

"I've had enough of this," said Hwin.  "The Hermit has been very good
to us and I'm very much obliged to him, I'm sure.  But I'm getting as
fat as a pet pony, eating all day and getting no exercise.  Let's go on
to Narnia."

"Oh not to-day, Ma'am," said Bree.  "I wouldn't hurry things.  Some
other day, don't you think?"

"We must see Shasta first and say good-bye to him--and--and apologise,"
said Aravis.

"Exactly!" said Bree with great enthusiasm.  "Just what I was going to
say."

"Oh, of course," said Hwin.  "I expect he is in Anvard.  Naturally we'd
look in on him and say good-bye.  But that's on our way.  And why
shouldn't we start at once?  After all, I thought it was Narnia we all
wanted to get to?"

"I suppose so," said Aravis.  She was beginning to wonder what exactly
she would do when she got there and was feeling a little lonely.

"Of course, of course," said Bree hastily.  "But there's no need to
rush things, if you know what I mean."

"No, I don't know what you mean," said Hwin.  "Why don't you want to
go?"

"M-m-m, broo-hoo," muttered Bree.  "Well, don't you see, Ma'am--it's an
important occasion--returning to one's own country--entering
society--the best society--it is so essential to make a good
impression--not perhaps looking quite ourselves, yet, eh?"

Hwin broke out into a horse-laugh.  "It's your tail, Bree!  I see it
all now.  You want to wait till your tail's grown again!  And we don't
even know if tails are worn long in Narnia.  Really, Bree, you're as
vain as that Tarkheena in Tashbaan!"

"You _are_ silly, Bree," said Aravis.

"By the Lion's Mane, Tarkheena, I'm nothing of the sort," said Bree
indignantly.  "I have a proper respect for myself and for my fellow
horses, that's all."

"Bree," said Aravis, who was not very interested in the cut of his
tail, "I've been wanting to ask you something for a long time.  Why do
you keep on swearing _By the Lion_ and _By the Lion's Mane_?  I thought
you hated lions."

"So I do," answered Bree.  "But when I speak of _the_ Lion of course I
mean Aslan, the great deliverer of Narnia who drove away the Witch and
the Winter.  All Narnians swear by _him_."

"But is he a lion?"

"No, no, of course not," said Bree in a rather shocked voice.

"All the stories about him in Tashbaan say he is," replied Aravis.
"And if he isn't a lion why do you call him a lion?"

"Well you'd hardly understand that at your age," said Bree.  "And I was
only a little foal when I left so I don't quite fully understand it
myself."

(Bree was standing with his back to the green wall while he said this,
and the other two were facing him.  He was talking in rather a superior
tone with his eyes half shut; that was why he didn't see the changed
expression in the faces of Hwin and Aravis.  They had good reason to
have open mouths and staring eyes; because while Bree spoke they saw an
enormous lion leap up from outside and balance itself on the top of the
green wall; only it was a brighter yellow and it was bigger and more
beautiful and more alarming than any lion they had ever seen.  And at
once it jumped down inside the wall and began approaching Bree from
behind.  It made no noise at all.  And Hwin and Aravis couldn't make
any noise themselves, no more than if they were frozen.)

"No doubt," continued Bree, "when they speak of him as a Lion they only
mean he's as strong as a lion or (to our enemies, of course) as fierce
as a lion.  Or something of that kind.  Even a little girl like you,
Aravis, must see that it would be quite absurd to suppose he is a
_real_ lion.  Indeed it would be disrespectful.  If he was a lion he'd
have to be a Beast just like the rest of us.  Why!" (and here Bree
began to laugh) "If he was a lion he'd have four paws, and a tail, and
_Whiskers_! ... Aie, ooh, hoo-hoo!  Help!"

For just as he said the word _Whiskers_ one of Aslan's had actually
tickled his ear.  Bree shot away like an arrow to the other side of the
enclosure and there turned; the wall was too high for him to jump and
he could fly no further.  Aravis and Hwin both started back.  There was
about a second of intense silence.

Then Hwin, though shaking all over, gave a strange little neigh, and
trotted across to the Lion.

"Please," she said, "you're so beautiful.  You may eat me if you like.
I'd sooner be eaten by you than fed by anyone else."

"Dearest daughter," said Aslan, planting a lion's kiss on her
twitching, velvet nose, "I knew you would not be long in coming to me.
Joy shall be yours."

Then he lifted his head and spoke in a louder voice.

"Now, Bree," he said, "you poor, proud, frightened Horse, draw near.
Nearer still, my son.  Do not dare not to dare.  Touch me.  Smell me.
Here are my paws, here is my tail, these are my whiskers.  I am a true
Beast."

"Aslan," said Bree in a shaken voice, "I'm afraid I must be rather a
fool."

"Happy the Horse who knows that while he is still young.  Or the Human
either.  Draw near, Aravis my daughter.  See!  My paws are velveted.
You will not be torn this time."

"This time, Sir?" said Aravis.

"It was I who wounded you," said Aslan.  "I am the only lion you met in
all your journeyings.  Do you know why I tore you?"

"No, sir."

"The scratches on your back, tear for tear, throb for throb, blood for
blood, were equal to the stripes laid on the back of your stepmother's
slave because of the drugged sleep you cast upon her.  You needed to
know what it felt like."

"Yes, sir.  Please----"

"Ask on, my dear," said Aslan.

"Will any more harm come to her by what I did?"

"Child," said the Lion, "I am telling you your story, not hers.  No-one
is told any story but their own."  Then he shook his head and spoke in
a lighter voice.

"Be merry, little ones," he said.  "We shall meet soon again.  But
before that you will have another visitor."  Then in one bound he
reached the top of the wall and vanished from their sight.

Strange to say, they felt no inclination to talk to one another about
him after he had gone.  They all moved slowly away to different parts
of the quiet grass and there paced to and fro, each alone, thinking.

About half an hour later the two Horses were summoned to the back of
the house to eat something nice that the Hermit had got ready for them
and Aravis, still walking and thinking, was startled by the harsh sound
of a trumpet outside the gate.

"Who is there?" said Aravis.

"His Royal Highness Prince Cor of Archenland," said a voice from
outside.

Aravis undid the door and opened it, drawing back a little way to let
the strangers in.

Two soldiers with halberds came first and took their stand at each side
of the entry.  Then followed a herald, and the trumpeter.

"His Royal Highness Prince Cor of Archenland desires an audience of the
Lady Aravis," said the Herald.  Then he and the trumpeter drew aside
and bowed and the soldiers saluted and the Prince himself came in.  All
his attendants withdrew and closed the gate behind them.

The Prince bowed, and a very clumsy bow for a Prince it was.  Aravis
curtsied in the Calormene style (which is not at all like ours) and did
it very well because, of course, she had been taught how.  Then she
looked up and saw what sort of person this Prince was.

She saw a mere boy.  He was bare-headed and his fair hair was encircled
with a very thin band of gold, hardly thicker than a wire.  His upper
tunic was of white cambric, as fine as a handkerchief, so that the
bright red tunic beneath it showed through.  His left hand, which
rested on his enamelled sword hilt, was bandaged.

Aravis looked twice at his face before she gasped and said, "Why!  It's
Shasta!"

Shasta all at once turned very red and began speaking very quickly.
"Look here, Aravis," he said, "I do hope you won't think I'm got up
like this (and the trumpeter and all) to try to impress you or make out
that I'm different or any rot of that sort.  Because I'd far rather
have come in my old clothes, but they're burnt now, and my father
said----"

"Your father?" said Aravis.

"Apparently King Lune is my father," said Shasta.  "I might really have
guessed it.  Corin being so like me.  We were twins, you see.  Oh, and
my name isn't Shasta, it's Cor."

"Cor is a nicer name than Shasta," said Aravis.

"Brothers' names run like that in Archenland," said Shasta (or Prince
Cor as we must now call him).  "Like Dar and Darrin, Cole and Colin and
so on."

"Shasta--I mean Cor," said Aravis.  "No, shut up.  There's something
I've got to say at once.  I'm sorry I've been such a pig.  But I did
change before I knew you were a Prince, honestly I did: when you went
back, and faced the Lion."

"It wasn't really going to kill you at all, that Lion," said Cor.

"I know," said Aravis, nodding.  Both were still and solemn for a
moment as each saw that the other knew about Aslan.

Suddenly Aravis remembered Cor's bandaged hand.

"I say!" she cried, "I forgot!  You've been in a battle.  Is that a
wound?"

"A mere scratch," said Cor, using for the first time a rather lordly
tone.  But a moment later he burst out laughing and said, "If you want
to know the truth, it isn't a proper wound at all.  I only took the
skin off my knuckles, just as any clumsy fool might do without going
near a battle."

"Still you were in the battle," said Aravis.  "It must have been
wonderful."

"It wasn't at all like what I thought," said Cor.

"But Sha--Cor, I mean--you haven't told me anything yet about King Lune
and how he found out who you were."

"Well, let's sit down," said Cor.  "For it's rather a long story.  And
by the way, Father's an absolute brick.  I'd be just as pleased--or
very nearly--at finding he's my father even if he wasn't a king.  Even
though Education and all sorts of horrible things are going to happen
to me.  But you want the story.  Well, Corin and I were twins.  And
about a week after we were both born, apparently, they took us to a
wise old Centaur in Narnia to be blessed or something.  Now this
Centaur was a prophet as a good many Centaurs are.  Perhaps you haven't
seen any Centaurs yet?  There were some in the battle yesterday.  Most
remarkable people, but I can't say I feel quite at home with them yet.
I say, Aravis, there are going to be a lot of things to get used to in
these Northern countries."

"Yes, there are," said Aravis.  "But get on with the story."

"Well, as soon as he saw Corin and me, it seems this Centaur looked at
me and said, A day will come when that boy will save Archenland from
the deadliest danger in which ever she lay.  So of course my Father and
Mother were very pleased.  But there was someone present who wasn't.
This was a chap called the Lord Bar who had been Father's Lord
Chancellor.  And apparently he'd done something wrong--_bezzling_ or
some word like that--I didn't understand that part very well--and
Father had had to dismiss him.  But nothing else was done to him and he
was allowed to go on living in Archenland.  But he must have been as
bad as he could be, for it came out afterwards he had been in the pay
of the Tisroc and had sent a lot of secret information to Tashbaan.  So
as soon as he heard I was going to save Archenland from a great danger
he decided I must be put out of the way.  Well, he succeeded in
kidnapping me (I don't exactly know how) and rode away down the Winding
Arrow to the coast.  He'd had everything prepared and there was a ship
manned with his own followers lying ready for him and he put out to sea
with me on board.  But Father got wind of it, though not quite in time,
and was after him as quickly as he could.  The Lord Bar was already at
sea when Father reached the coast, but not out of sight.  And Father
was embarked in one of his own war-ships within twenty minutes.

"It must have been a wonderful chase.  They were six days following
Bar's galleon and brought her to battle on the seventh.  It was a great
sea-fight (I heard a lot about it yesterday evening) from ten o'clock
in the morning till sunset.  Our people took the ship in the end.  But
I wasn't there.  The Lord Bar himself had been killed in the battle.
But one of his men said that, early that morning, as soon as he saw he
was certain to be overhauled, Bar had given me to one of his knights
and sent us both away in the ship's boat.  And that boat was never seen
again.  But of course that was the same boat that Aslan (he seems to be
at the back of all the stories) pushed ashore at the right place for
Arsheesh to pick me up.  I wish I knew that knight's name, for he must
have kept me alive and starved himself to do it."

"I suppose Aslan would say that was part of someone else's story," said
Aravis.

"I was forgetting that," said Cor.

"And I wonder how the prophecy will work out," said Aravis, "and what
the great danger is that you're to save Archenland from."

"Well," said Cor rather awkwardly, "they seem to think I've done it
already."

Aravis clapped her hands.  "Why, of course!" she said.  "How stupid I
am.  And how wonderful!  Archenland can never be in much greater danger
than it was when Rabadash had crossed the Arrow with his two hundred
horse and you hadn't yet got through with your message.  Don't you feel
proud?"

"I think I feel a bit scared," said Cor.

"And you'll be living at Anvard now," said Aravis rather wistfully.

"Oh!" said Cor, "I'd nearly forgotten what I came about.  Father wants
you to come and live with us.  He says there's been no lady in the
court (they call it the court, I don't know why) since Mother died.
Do, Aravis.  You'll like Father--and Corin.  They're not like me;
they've been properly brought up.  You needn't be afraid that----"

"Oh stop it," said Aravis, "or we'll have a real fight.  Of course I'll
come."

"Now let's go and see the Horses," said Cor.

There was a great and joyous meeting between Bree and Cor, and Bree,
who was still in a rather subdued frame of mind, agreed to set out for
Anvard at once: he and Hwin would cross into Narnia on the following
day.  All four bade an affectionate farewell to the Hermit and promised
that they would soon visit him again.  By about the middle of the
morning they were on their way.  The Horses had expected that Aravis
and Cor would ride, but Cor explained that except in war, where
everyone must do what he can do best, no-one in Narnia or Archenland
ever dreamed of mounting a Talking Horse.

This reminded poor Bree again of how little he knew about Narnian
customs and what dreadful mistakes he might make.  So while Hwin
strolled along in a happy dream, Bree got more nervous and more
self-conscious with every step he took.

"Buck up, Bree," said Cor.  "It's far worse for me than for you.  You
aren't going to be _educated_.  I shall be learning reading and writing
and heraldry and dancing and history and music while you'll be
galloping and rolling on the hills of Narnia to your heart's content."

"But that's just the point," groaned Bree.  "_Do_ Talking Horses roll?
Supposing they don't?  I can't bear to give it up.  What do you think,
Hwin?"

"I'm going to roll anyway," said Hwin.  "I don't suppose any of them
will care two lumps of sugar whether you roll or not."

"Are we near that castle?" said Bree to Cor.

"Round the next bend," said the Prince.

"Well," said Bree, "I'm going to have a good one now: it may be the
last.  Wait for me a minute."

It was five minutes before he rose again, blowing hard and covered with
bits of bracken.

"Now I'm ready," he said in a voice of profound gloom.  "Lead on,
Prince Cor.  Narnia and the North."

But he looked more like a horse going to a funeral than a long-lost
captive returning to home and freedom.




_Chapter XV_

RABADASH THE RIDICULOUS

The next turn of the road brought them out from among the trees and
there, across green lawns, sheltered from the north wind by the high
wooded ridge at its back, they saw the castle of Anvard.  It was very
old and built of a warm, reddish-brown stone.

Before they had reached the gate King Lune came out to meet them, not
looking at all like Aravis's idea of a king and wearing the oldest of
old clothes; for he had just come from making a round of the kennels
with his Huntsman and had only stopped for a moment to wash his doggy
hands.  But the bow with which he greeted Aravis as he took her hand
would have been stately enough for an Emperor.

"Little lady," he said, "we bid you very heartily welcome.  If my dear
wife were still alive we could make you better cheer but could not do
it with a better will.  And I am sorry that you have had misfortunes
and been driven from your father's house, which cannot but be a grief
to you.  My son Cor has told me about your adventures together and all
your valour."

"It was he who did all that, Sir," said Aravis.  "Why, he rushed at a
lion to save me."

"Eh, what's that?" said King Lune, his face brightening.  "I haven't
heard that part of the story."

Then Aravis told it.  And Cor, who had very much wanted the story to be
known, though he felt he couldn't tell it himself, didn't enjoy it so
much as he had expected, and indeed felt rather foolish.  But his
father enjoyed it very much indeed and in the course of the next few
weeks told it to so many people that Cor wished it had never happened.

Then the King turned to Hwin and Bree and was just as polite to them as
to Aravis, and asked them a lot of questions about their families and
where they had lived in Narnia before they had been captured.  The
Horses were rather tongue-tied for they weren't yet used to being
talked to as equals by Humans--grown-up Humans, that is.  They didn't
mind Aravis and Cor.

Presently Queen Lucy came out from the castle and joined them and King
Lune said to Aravis, "My dear, here is a loving friend of our house,
and she has been seeing that your apartments are put to rights for you
better than I could have done it."

"You'd like to come and see them, wouldn't you?" said Lucy, kissing
Aravis.  They liked each other at once and soon went away together to
talk about Aravis's bedroom and Aravis's boudoir and about getting
clothes for her, and all the sort of things girls do talk about on such
an occasion.

After lunch, which they had on the terrace (it was cold birds and cold
game pie and wine and bread and cheese), King Lune ruffled up his brow
and heaved a sigh and said, "Heigh-ho!  We have still that sorry
creature Rabadash on our hands, my friends, and must needs resolve what
to do with him."

Lucy was sitting on the King's right and Aravis on his left.  King
Edmund sat at one end of the table and the Lord Darrin faced him at the
other.  Dar and Peridan and Cor and Corin were on the same side as the
King.

"Your Majesty would have a perfect right to strike off his head," said
Peridan.  "Such an assault as he made puts him on a level with
assassins."

"It is very true," said Edmund.  "But even a traitor may mend.  I have
known one that did."  And he looked very thoughtful.

"To kill this Rabadash would go near to raising war with the Tisroc,"
said Darrin.

"A fig for the Tisroc," said King Lune.  "His strength is in numbers
and numbers will never cross the desert.  But I have no stomach for
killing men (even traitors) in cold blood.  To have cut his throat in
the battle would have eased my heart mightily: but this is a different
thing."

"By my counsel," said Lucy, "your Majesty shall give him another trial.
Let him go free on strait promise of fair dealing in the future.  It
may be that he will keep his word."

"Maybe Apes will grow honest, Sister," said Edmund.  "But, by the Lion,
if he breaks it again, it may be in such time and place that any of us
could swap off his head in clean battle."

"It shall be tried," said the King: and then to one of the attendants,
"Send for the prisoner, friend."

Rabadash was brought before them in chains.  To look at him anyone
would have supposed that he had passed the night in a noisome dungeon
without food or water; but in reality he had been shut up in quite a
comfortable room and provided with an excellent supper.  But as he was
sulking far too furiously to touch the supper and had spent the whole
night stamping and roaring and cursing, he naturally did not now look
his best.

"Your royal Highness needs not to be told," said King Lune, "that by
the law of nations as well as by all reasons, of prudent policy, we
have as good right to your head as ever one mortal man had against
another.  Nevertheless, in consideration of your youth and the ill
nurture, devoid of all gentilesse and courtesy, which you have
doubtless had in the land of slaves and tyrants, we are disposed to set
you free, unharmed, on these conditions: first, that----"

"Curse you for a barbarian dog!" spluttered Rabadash.  "Do you think I
will even hear your conditions?  Faugh!  You talk very largely of
nurture and I know not what.  It's easy, to a man in chains, ha!  Take
off these vile bonds, give me a sword, and let any of you who dares
then debate with me."

Nearly all the lords sprang to their feet, and Corin shouted:

"Father!  Can I _box_ him?  Please."

"Peace!  Your Majesties!  My Lords!" said King Lune.  "Have we no more
gravity among us than to be so chafed by the taunt of a pajock?  Sit
down, Corin, or shalt leave the table.  I ask your Highness again, to
hear our conditions."

"I hear no conditions from barbarians and sorcerers," said Rabadash.
"Not one of you dare touch a hair of my head.  Every insult you have
heaped on me shall be paid with oceans of Narnian and Archenlandish
blood.  Terrible shall the vengeance of the Tisroc be: even now.  But
kill me, and the burnings and torturings in these northern lands shall
become a tale to frighten the world a thousand years hence.  Beware!
Beware!  Beware!  The bolt of Tash falls from above!"

"Does it ever get caught on a hook half way?" asked Corin.

"Shame, Corin," said the King.  "Never taunt a man save when he is
stronger than you: then, as you please."

"Oh you foolish Rabadash," sighed Lucy.

Next moment Cor wondered why everyone at the table had risen and was
standing perfectly still.  Of course he did the same himself.  And then
he saw the reason.  Aslan was among them though no-one had seen him
coming.  Rabadash started as the immense shape of the Lion paced softly
in between him and his accusers.

"Rabadash," said Aslan.  "Take heed.  Your doom is very near, but you
may still avoid it.  Forget your pride (what have you to be proud of?)
and your anger (who has done you wrong?) and accept the mercy of these
good kings."

Then Rabadash rolled his eyes and spread out his mouth into a horrible,
long mirthless grin like a shark, and wagged his ears up and down
(anyone can learn how to do this if they take the trouble).  He had
always found this very effective in Calormen.  The bravest had trembled
when he made these faces, and ordinary people had fallen to the floor,
and sensitive people had often fainted.  But what Rabadash hadn't
realised is that it is very easy to frighten people who know you can
have them boiled alive the moment you give the word.  The grimaces
didn't look at all alarming in Archenland; indeed Lucy only thought
Rabadash was going to be sick.

"Demon!  Demon!  Demon!" shrieked the Prince.  "I know you.  You are
the foul fiend of Narnia.  You are the enemy of the gods.  Learn who
_I_ am, horrible phantasm.  I am descended from Tash, the inexorable,
the irresistible.  The curse of Tash is upon you.  Lightning in the
shape of scorpions shall be rained on you.  The mountains of Narnia
shall be ground into dust.  The----"

"Have a care, Rabadash," said Aslan quietly.  "The doom is nearer now:
it is at the door: it has lifted the latch."

"Let the skies fall," shrieked Rabadash.  "Let the earth gape!  Let
blood and fire obliterate the world!  But be sure I will never desist
till I have dragged to my palace by her hair the barbarian queen, the
daughter of dogs, the----"

"The hour has struck," said Aslan: and Rabadash saw, to his supreme
horror, that everyone had begun to laugh.

They couldn't help it.  Rabadash had been wagging his ears all the time
and as soon as Aslan said, "The hour has struck!" the ears began to
change.  They grew longer and more pointed and soon were covered with
grey hair.  And while everyone was wondering where they had seen ears
like that before, Rabadash's face began to change too.  It grew longer,
and thicker at the top and larger eyed, and the nose sank back into the
face (or else the face swelled out and became all nose) and there was
hair all over it.  And his arms grew longer and came down in front of
him till his hands were resting on the ground: only they weren't hands,
now, they were hoofs.  And he was standing on all fours, and his
clothes disappeared, and everyone laughed louder and louder (because
they couldn't help it) for now what had been Rabadash was simply and
unmistakably, a donkey.  The terrible thing was that his human speech
lasted just a moment longer than his human shape, so that when he
realised the change that was coming over him, he screamed out:

"Oh, not a Donkey!  Mercy!  If it were even a horse--even a
horse--e'en--a--hor--eeh--auh, eeh-auh."  And so the words died away
into a donkey's bray.

"Now hear me, Rabadash," said Aslan.  "Justice shall be mixed with
mercy.  You shall not always be an Ass."

At this of course the Donkey twitched its ears forward--and that also
was so funny that everybody laughed all the more.  They tried not to,
but they tried in vain.

"You have appealed to Tash," said Aslan.  "And in the temple of Tash
you shall be healed.  You must stand before the altar of Tash in
Tashbaan at the great Autumn Feast this year and there, in the sight of
all Tashbaan, your ass's shape will fall from you and all men will know
you for Prince Rabadash.  But as long as you live, if ever you go more
than ten miles away from the great temple in Tashbaan you shall
instantly become again as you now are.  And from that second change
there will be no return."

There was a short silence and then they all stirred and looked at one
another as if they were waking from sleep.  Aslan was gone.  But there
was a brightness in the air and on the grass, and a joy in their
hearts, which assured them that he had been no dream: and anyway, there
was the donkey in front of them.

King Lune was the kindest-hearted of men and on seeing his enemy in
this regrettable condition he forgot all his anger.

"Your royal Highness," he said, "I am most truly sorry that things have
come to this extremity.  Your Highness will bear witness that it was
none of our doing.  And of course we shall be delighted to provide your
Highness with shipping back to Tashbaan for the--er--treatment which
Aslan has prescribed.  You shall have every comfort which your
Highness's situation allows: the best of the cattle-boats--the freshest
carrots and thistles----"

But a deafening bray from the Donkey and a well-aimed kick at one of
the guards made it clear that these kindly offers were ungratefully
received.

And here, to get him out of the way, I'd better finish off the story of
Rabadash.  He (or it) was duly sent back by boat to Tashbaan and
brought into the temple of Tash at the great Autumn Festival, and then
he became a man again.  But of course four or five thousand people had
seen the transformation and the affair could not possibly be hushed up.
And after the old Tisroc's death when Rabadash became Tisroc in his
place he turned out the most peaceable Tisroc Calormen had ever known.
This was because, not daring to go more than ten miles from Tashbaan,
he could never go on a war himself; and he didn't want his Tarkaans to
win fame in the wars at his expense, for that is the way Tisrocs get
overthrown.  But though his reasons were selfish, it made things much
more comfortable for all the smaller countries round Calormen.  His own
people never forgot that he had been a donkey.  During his reign, and
to his face, he was called Rabadash the Peacemaker, but after his death
and behind his back he was called Rabadash the Ridiculous, and if you
look him up in a good History of Calormen (try the local library) you
will find him under that name.  And to this day in Calormene schools,
if you do anything unusually stupid, you are very likely to be called
"a second Rabadash".

Meanwhile at Anvard everyone was very glad that he had been disposed of
before the real fun began, which was a grand feast held that evening on
the lawn before the castle, with dozens of lanterns to help the
moonlight.  And the wine flowed and tales were told and jokes were
cracked, and then silence was made and the King's poet with two
fiddlers stepped out into the middle of the circle.  Aravis and Cor
prepared themselves to be bored, for the only poetry they knew was the
Calormene kind, and you know now what that was like.  But at the very
first scrape of the fiddles a rocket seemed to go up inside their
heads, and the poet sang the great old lay of Fair Olvin and how he
fought the Giant Pire and turned him into stone (and that is the origin
of Mount Pire--it was a two-headed Giant) and won the Lady Liln for his
bride; and when it was over they wished it was going to begin again.
And though Bree couldn't sing he told the story of the fight at
Zalindreh.  And Lucy told again (they had all, except Aravis and Cor,
heard it many times but they all wanted it again) the tale of the
Wardrobe and how she and King Edmund and Queen Susan and Peter the High
King had first come into Narnia.

And presently, as was certain to happen sooner or later, King Lune said
it was time for young people to be in bed.  "And to-morrow, Cor," he
added, "shalt come over all the castle with me and see the estres and
mark all its strength and weakness: for it will be thine to guard when
I'm gone."

"But Corin will be the King then, Father," said Cor.

"Nay, lad," said King Lune, "thou art my heir.  The crown comes to
thee."

"But I don't want it," said Cor.  "I'd far rather----"

"'Tis no question what thou wantest, Cor, nor I either.  'Tis in course
of law."

"But if we're twins we must be the same age."

"Nay," said the King with a laugh.  "One must come first.  Art Corin's
elder by full twenty minutes.  And his better too, let's hope, though
that's no great mastery."  And he looked at Corin with a twinkle in his
eyes.

"But, Father, couldn't you make whichever you like to be the next King?"

"No.  The King's under the law, for it's the law makes him a king.
Hast no more power to start away from thy crown than any sentry from
his post."

"Oh dear," said Cor.  "I don't want to at all.  And Corin--I am most
dreadfully sorry.  I never dreamed my turning up was going to chisel
you out of your kingdom."

"Hurrah!  Hurrah!" said Corin.  "I shan't have to be King.  I shan't
have to be King.  I'll always be a prince.  It's princes have all the
fun."

"And that's truer than thy brother knows, Cor," said King Lune.  "For
this is what it means to be a king: to be first in every desperate
attack and last in every desperate retreat, and when there's hunger in
the land (as must be now and then in bad years) to wear finer clothes
and laugh louder over a scantier meal than any man in your land."

When the two boys were going upstairs to bed Cor again asked Corin if
nothing could be done about it.  And Corin said:

"If you say another word about it, I'll--I'll knock you down."

It would be nice to end the story by saying that after that the two
brothers never disagreed about anything again, but I am afraid it would
not be true.  In reality they quarrelled and fought just about as often
as any other two boys would, and all their fights ended (if they didn't
begin) with Cor getting knocked down.  For though, when they had both
grown up and become swordsmen, Cor was the more dangerous man in
battle, neither he nor anyone else in the North Countries could ever
equal Corin as a boxer.  That was how he got his name of Corin
Thunder-Fist; and how he performed his great exploit against the Lapsed
Bear of Stormness, which was really a Talking Bear but had gone back to
Wild Bear habits.  Corin climbed up to its lair on the Narnian side of
Stormness one winter day when the snow was on the hills and boxed it
without a timekeeper for thirty-three rounds.  And at the end it
couldn't see out of its eyes and became a reformed character.

Aravis also had many quarrels (and, I'm afraid even fights) with Cor,
but they always made it up again: so that years later, when they were
grown up, they were so used to quarrelling and making it up again that
they got married so as to go on doing it more conveniently.  And after
King Lune's death they made a good King and Queen of Archenland and Ram
the Great, the most famous of all the kings of Archenland, was their
son.  Bree and Hwin lived happily to a great age in Narnia and both got
married but not to one another.  And there weren't many months in which
one or both of them didn't come trotting over the pass to visit their
friends at Anvard.






[End of The Horse and his Boy, by C. S. Lewis]
