
* A Project Gutenberg Canada Ebook *

This ebook is made available at no cost and with very few
restrictions. These restrictions apply only if (1) you make
a change in the ebook (other than alteration for different
display devices), or (2) you are making commercial use of
the ebook. If either of these conditions applies, please
check gutenberg.ca/links/licence.html before proceeding.

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be
under copyright in some countries. If you live outside Canada,
check your country's copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER
COPYRIGHT IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT DOWNLOAD
OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

Title: The Voyage of the Dawn Treader
Author: Lewis, C. S. [Clive Staples] (1898-1963)
Date of first publication: 1952
Edition used as base for this ebook:
  London: Geoffrey Bles, 1964
  [fifth printing]
Date first posted: 2 February 2014
Date last updated: 2 February 2014
Project Gutenberg Canada ebook #1155

This ebook was produced by Al Haines


[Transcriber's note: Because of copyright considerations,
the illustrations by Pauline Baynes (1922-2008) have been
omitted from this etext.]






  THE VOYAGE OF THE
  _DAWN TREADER_


  by
  C. S. LEWIS




  TO
  GEOFFREY CORBETT




  CONTENTS


  I.  THE PICTURE IN THE BEDROOM
  II.  ON BOARD THE "DAWN TREADER"
  III.  THE LONE ISLANDS
  IV.  WHAT CASPIAN DID THERE
  V.  THE STORM AND WHAT CAME OF IT
  VI.  THE ADVENTURES OF EUSTACE
  VII.  HOW THE ADVENTURE ENDED
  VIII.  TWO NARROW ESCAPES
  IX.  THE ISLAND OF THE VOICES
  X.  THE MAGICIAN'S BOOK
  XI.  THE DUFFLEPUDS MADE HAPPY
  XII.  THE DARK ISLAND
  XIII.  THE THREE SLEEPERS
  XIV.  THE BEGINNING OF THE END OF THE WORLD
  XV.  THE WONDERS OF THE LAST SEA
  XVI.  THE VERY END OF THE WORLD




_Chapter I_

THE PICTURE IN THE BEDROOM

There was a boy called Eustace Clarence Scrubb, and he almost deserved
it.  His parents called him Eustace Clarence and masters called him
Scrubb.  I can't tell you how his friends spoke to him, for he had
none.  He didn't call his Father and Mother "Father" and "Mother", but
Harold and Alberta.  They were very up-to-date and advanced people.
They were vegetarians, non-smokers and teetotallers and wore a special
kind of underclothes.  In their house there was very little furniture
and very few clothes on the beds and the windows were always open.

Eustace Clarence liked animals, especially beetles, if they were dead
and pinned on a card.  He liked books if they were books of information
and had pictures of grain elevators or of fat foreign children doing
exercises in model schools.

Eustace Clarence disliked his cousins the four Pevensies, Peter, Susan,
Edmund and Lucy.  But he was quite glad when he heard that Edmund and
Lucy were coming to stay.  For deep down inside him he liked bossing
and bullying; and, though he was a puny little person who couldn't have
stood up even to Lucy, let alone Edmund, in a fight, he knew that there
are dozens of ways to give people a bad time if you are in your own
home and they are only visitors.

Edmund and Lucy did not at all want to come and stay with Uncle Harold
and Aunt Alberta.  But it really couldn't be helped.  Father had got a
job lecturing in America for sixteen weeks that summer, and Mother was
to go with him because she hadn't had a real holiday for ten years.
Peter was working very hard for an exam and he was to spend the
holidays being coached by old Professor Kirke in whose house these four
children had had wonderful adventures long ago in the war years.  If he
had still been in that house he would have had them all to stay.  But
he had somehow become poor since the old days and was living in a small
cottage with only one bedroom to spare.  It would have cost too much
money to take the other three all to America, and Susan had gone.
Grown-ups thought her the pretty one of the family and she was no good
at school work (though otherwise very old for her age) and Mother said
she "would get far more out of a trip to America than the youngsters".
Edmund and Lucy tried not to grudge Susan her luck, but it was dreadful
having to spend the summer holidays at their Aunt's.  "But it's far
worse for me," said Edmund, "because you'll at least have a room of
your own and I shall have to share a bedroom with that record stinker,
Eustace."

The story begins on an afternoon when Edmund and Lucy were stealing a
few precious minutes alone together.  And of course they were talking
about Narnia, which was the name of their own private and secret
country.  Most of us, I suppose, have a secret country but for most of
us it is only an imaginary country.  Edmund and Lucy were luckier than
other people in that respect.  Their secret country was real.  They had
already visited it twice; not in a game or a dream, but in reality.
They had got there of course by Magic, which is the only way of getting
to Narnia.  And a promise, or very nearly a promise, had been made them
in Narnia itself that they would some day get back.  You may imagine
that they talked about it a good deal, when they got the chance.

They were in Lucy's room, sitting on the edge of her bed and looking at
a picture on the opposite wall.  It was the only picture in the house
that they liked.  Aunt Alberta didn't like it at all (that was why it
was put away in a little back room upstairs), but she couldn't get rid
of it because it had been a wedding present from someone she did not
want to offend.

It was a picture of a ship--a ship sailing nearly straight towards you.
Her prow was gilded and shaped like the head of a dragon with wide open
mouth.  She had only one mast and one large, square sail which was a
rich purple.  The sides of the ship--what you could see of them where
the gilded wings of the dragon ended--were green.  She had just run up
to the top of one glorious blue wave, and the nearer slope of that wave
came down towards you, with streaks and bubbles on it.  She was
obviously running fast before a gay wind, listing over a little on her
port side.  (By the way, if you are going to read this story at all,
and if you don't know already, you had better get it into your head
that the left of a ship when you are looking ahead, is _port_, and the
right is _starboard_.)  All the sunlight fell on her from that side,
and the water on that side was full of greens and purples.  On the
other, it was darker blue from the shadow of the ship.

"The question is," said Edmund, "whether it doesn't make things worse,
_looking_ at a Narnian ship when you can't get there."

"Even looking is better than nothing," said Lucy.  "And she is such a
very Narnian ship."

"Still playing your old game?" said Eustace Clarence, who had been
listening outside the door and now came grinning into the room.  Last
year, when he had been staying with the Pevensies, he had managed to
hear them all talking of Narnia and he loved teasing them about it.  He
thought of course that they were making it all up; and as he was far
too stupid to make anything up himself, he did not approve of that.

"You're not wanted here," said Edmund curtly.

"I'm trying to think of a limerick," said Eustace.  "Something like
this:

  "Some kids who played games about Narnia
  Got gradually balmier and balmier----"


"Well, _Narnia_ and _balmier_ don't rhyme, to begin with," said Lucy.

"It's an assonance," said Eustace.

"Don't ask him what an assy-thingummy is," said Edmund.  "He's only
longing to be asked.  Say nothing and perhaps he'll go away."

Most boys, on meeting a reception like this, would either have cleared
out or flared up.  Eustace did neither.  He just hung about grinning,
and presently began talking again.

"Do you like that picture?" he asked.

"For Heaven's sake don't let him get started about Art and all that,"
said Edmund hurriedly, but Lucy, who was very truthful, had already
said, "Yes, I do.  I like it very much."

"It's a rotten picture," said Eustace.

"You won't see it if you step outside," said Edmund.

"Why do you like it?" said Eustace to Lucy.

"Well, for one thing," said Lucy, "I like it because the ship looks as
if it was really moving.  And the water looks as if it was really wet.
And the waves look as if they were really going up and down."

Of course Eustace knew lots of answers to this, but he didn't say
anything.  The reason was that at that very moment he looked at the
waves and saw that they did look very much indeed as if they were going
up and down.  He had only once been in a ship (and then only as far as
the Isle of Wight) and had been horribly seasick.  The look of the
waves in the picture made him feel sick again.  He turned rather green
and tried another look.  And then all three children were staring with
open mouths.

What they were seeing may be hard to believe when you read it in print,
but it was almost as hard to believe when you saw it happening.  The
things in the picture were moving.  It didn't look at all like a cinema
either; the colours were too real and clean and out-of-door for that.
Down went the prow of the ship into the wave and up went a great shock
of spray.  And then up went the wave behind her, and her stern and her
deck became visible for the first time, and then disappeared as the
next wave came to meet her and her bows went up again.  At the same
moment an exercise book which had been lying beside Edmund on the bed
flapped, rose and sailed through the air to the wall behind him, and
Lucy felt all her hair whipping round her face as it does on a windy
day.  And this was a windy day; but the wind was blowing out of the
picture towards them.  And suddenly with the wind came the noises--the
swishing of waves and the slap of water against the ship's sides and
the creaking and the over-all high, steady roar of air and water.  But
it was the smell, the wild, briny smell, which really convinced Lucy
that she was not dreaming.

"Stop it," came Eustace's voice, squeaky with fright and bad temper.
"It's some silly trick you two are playing.  Stop it.  I'll tell
Alberta--ow!"

The other two were much more accustomed to adventures, but, just
exactly as Eustace Clarence said "Ow," they both said "Ow" too.  The
reason was that a great cold, salt splash had broken right out of the
frame and they were breathless from the smack of it, besides being wet
through.

"I'll smash the rotten thing," cried Eustace; and then several things
happened at the same time.  Eustace rushed towards the picture.
Edmund, who knew something about magic, sprang after him, warning him
to look out and not to be a fool.  Lucy grabbed at him from the other
side and was dragged forward.  And by this time either they had grown
much smaller or the picture had grown bigger.  Eustace jumped to try to
pull it off the wall and found himself standing on the frame; in front
of him was not glass but real sea, and wind and waves rushing up to the
frame as they might to a rock.  He lost his head and clutched at the
other two who had jumped up beside him.  There was a second of
struggling and shouting, and just as they thought they had got their
balance a great blue roller surged up round them, swept them off their
feet, and drew them down into the sea.  Eustace's despairing cry
suddenly ended as the water got into his mouth.

Lucy thanked her stars that she had worked hard at her swimming last
summer term.  It is true that she would have got on much better if she
had used a slower stroke, and also that the water felt a great deal
colder than it had looked while it was only a picture.  Still, she kept
her head and kicked her shoes off, as everyone ought to do who falls
into deep water in their clothes.  She even kept her mouth shut and her
eyes open.  They were still quite near the ship; she saw its green side
towering high above them, and people looking at her from the deck.
Then, as one might have expected, Eustace clutched at her in a panic
and down they both went.

When they came up again she saw a white figure diving off the ship's
side.  Edmund was close beside her now, treading water, and had caught
the arms of the howling Eustace.  Then someone else, whose face was
vaguely familiar, slipped an arm under her from the other side.  There
was a lot of shouting going on from the ship, heads crowding together
above the bulwarks, ropes being thrown.  Edmund and the stranger were
fastening ropes round her.  After that followed what seemed a very long
delay during which her face got blue and her teeth began chattering.
In reality the delay was not very long; they were waiting till the
moment when she could be got on board the ship without being dashed
against its side.  Even with all their best endeavours she had a
bruised knee when she finally stood, dripping and shivering, on the
deck.  After her Edmund was heaved up, and then the miserable Eustace.
Last of all came the stranger--a golden-headed boy some years older
than herself.

"Ca--Ca--Caspian!" gasped Lucy as soon as she had breath enough.  For
Caspian it was; Caspian, the boy king of Narnia whom they had helped to
set on the throne during their last visit.  Immediately Edmund
recognised him too.  All three shook hands and clapped one another on
the back with great delight.

"But who is your friend?" said Caspian almost at once, turning to
Eustace with his cheerful smile.  But Eustace was crying much harder
than any boy of his age has a right to cry when nothing worse than a
wetting has happened to him, and would only yell out, "Let me go.  Let
me go back.  I don't _like_ it."

"Let you go?" said Caspian.  "But where?"

Eustace rushed to the ship's side, as if he expected to see the picture
frame hanging above the sea, and perhaps a glimpse of Lucy's bedroom.
What he saw was blue waves flecked with foam, and paler blue sky, both
spreading without a break to the horizon.  Perhaps we can hardly blame
him if his heart sank.  He was promptly sick.

"Hey!  Rynelf," said Caspian to one of the sailors.  "Bring spiced wine
for their Majesties.  You'll need something to warm you after that
dip."  He called Edmund and Lucy their Majesties because they and Peter
and Susan had all been Kings and Queens of Narnia long before his time.
Narnian time flows differently from ours.  If you spent a hundred years
in Narnia, you would still come back to our world at the very same hour
of the very same day on which you left.  And then, if you went back to
Narnia after spending a week here, you might find that a thousand
Narnian years had passed, or only a day, or no time at all.  You never
know till you get there.  Consequently, when the Pevensie children had
returned to Narnia last time for their second visit, it was (for the
Narnians) as if King Arthur came back to Britain, as some people say he
will.  And I say the sooner the better.

Rynelf returned with the spiced wine steaming in a flagon and four
silver cups.  It was just what one wanted, and as Lucy and Edmund
sipped it they could feel the warmth going right down to their toes.
But Eustace made faces and spluttered and spat it out and was sick
again and began to cry again and asked if they hadn't any Plumptree's
Vitaminised Nerve Food and could it be made with distilled water and
anyway he insisted on being put ashore at the next station.

"This is a merry shipmate you've brought us, Brother," whispered
Caspian to Edmund with a chuckle; but before he could say anything more
Eustace burst out again.

"Oh!  Ugh!  What on earth's _that_!  Take it away, the horrid thing."

He really had some excuse this time for feeling a little surprised.
Something very curious indeed had come out of the cabin in the poop and
was slowly approaching them.  You might call it--and indeed it was--a
Mouse.  But then it was a Mouse on its hind legs and stood about two
feet high.  A thin band of gold passed round its head under one ear and
over the other and in this was stuck a long crimson feather.  (As the
Mouse's fur was very dark, almost black, the effect was bold and
striking.)  Its left paw rested on the hilt of a sword very nearly as
long as its tail.  Its balance, as it paced gravely along the swaying
deck, was perfect, and its manners courtly.  Lucy and Edmund recognised
it at once--Reepicheep, the most valiant of all the Talking Beasts of
Narnia and the Chief Mouse.  It had won undying glory in the second
Battle of Beruna.  Lucy longed, as she had always done, to take
Reepicheep up in her arms and cuddle him.  But this, as she well knew,
was a pleasure she could never have: it would have offended him deeply.
Instead, she went down on one knee to talk to him.

Reepicheep put forward his left leg, drew back his right, bowed, kissed
her hand, straightened himself, twirled his whiskers, and said in his
shrill, piping voice:

"My humble duty to your Majesty.  And to King Edmund, too."  (Here he
bowed again.)  "Nothing except your Majesties' presence was lacking to
this glorious venture."

"Ugh, take it away," wailed Eustace.  "I hate mice.  And I never could
bear performing animals.  They're silly and vulgar and--and
sentimental."

"Am I to understand," said Reepicheep to Lucy after a long stare at
Eustace, "that this singularly discourteous person is under your
Majesty's protection?  Because, if not----"

At this moment Lucy and Edmund both sneezed.

"What a fool I am to keep you all standing here in your wet things,"
said Caspian.  "Come on below and get changed.  I'll give you up my
cabin of course, Lucy, but I'm afraid we have no women's clothes on
board.  You'll have to make do with some of mine.  Lead the way,
Reepicheep, like a good fellow."

"To the convenience of a lady," said Reepicheep, "even a question of
honour must give way--at least for the moment----" and here he looked
very hard at Eustace.  But Caspian hustled them on and in a few minutes
Lucy found herself passing through the door into the stern cabin.  She
fell in love with it at once--the three square windows that looked out
on the blue, swirling water astern, the low cushioned benches round
three sides of the table, the swinging silver lamp overhead (Dwarfs'
work, she knew at once by its exquisite delicacy) and the flat gold
image of Aslan the Lion on the forward wall above the door.  All this
she took in in a flash, for Caspian immediately opened a door on the
starboard side, and said, "This'll be your room, Lucy.  I'll just get
some dry things for myself"--he was rummaging in one of the lockers
while he spoke--"and then leave you to change.  If you'll fling your
wet things outside the door I'll get them taken to the galley to be
dried."

Lucy found herself as much at home as if she had been in Caspian's
cabin for weeks, and the motion of the ship did not worry her, for in
the old days when she had been a queen in Narnia she had done a good
deal of voyaging.  The cabin was very tiny but bright with painted
panels (all birds and beasts and crimson dragons and vines) and
spotlessly clean.  Caspian's clothes were too big for her, but she
could manage.  His shoes, sandals and sea-boots were hopelessly big but
she did not mind going barefoot on board ship.  When she had finished
dressing she looked out of her window at the water rushing past and
took in long deep breath.  She felt quite sure they were in for a
lovely time.




_Chapter II_

ON BOARD THE DAWN TREADER

"Ah, there you are, Lucy," said Caspian.  "We were just waiting for
you.  This is my captain, the Lord Drinian."

A dark-haired man went down on one knee and kissed her hand.  The only
others present were Reepicheep and Edmund.

"Where is Eustace?" asked Lucy.

"In bed," said Edmund, "and I don't think we can do anything for him.
It only makes him worse if you try to be nice to him."

"Meanwhile," said Caspian, "we want to talk."

"By Jove, we do," said Edmund.  "And first, about time.  It's a year
ago by our time since we left you just before your coronation.  How
long has it been in Narnia?"

"Exactly three years," said Caspian.

"All going well?" asked Edmund.

"You don't suppose I'd have left my kingdom and put to sea unless all
was well," answered the King.  "It couldn't be better.  There's no
trouble at all now between Telmarines, Dwarfs, Talking Beasts, Fauns
and the rest.  And we gave those troublesome giants on the frontier
such a good beating last summer that they pay us tribute now.  And I
had an excellent person to leave as Regent while I'm away--Trumpkin,
the Dwarf.  You remember him?"

"Dear Trumpkin," said Lucy, "of course I do.  You couldn't have made a
better choice."

"Loyal as a badger, Ma'am, and valiant as--as a Mouse," said Drinian.
He had been going to say "as a lion" but had noticed Reepicheep's eyes
fixed on him.

"And where are we heading for?" asked Edmund.

"Well," said Caspian, "that's rather a long story.  Perhaps you
remember that when I was a child my usurping uncle Miraz got rid of
seven friends of my father's (who might have taken my part) by sending
them off to explore the unknown Eastern Seas beyond the Lone Islands."

"Yes," said Lucy, "and none of them ever came back."

"Right.  Well, on my coronation day, with Aslan's approval, I swore an
oath that, if once I established peace in Narnia, I would sail east
myself for a year and a day to find my father's friends or to learn of
their deaths and avenge them if I could.  These were their names--the
Lord Revilian, the Lord Bern, the Lord Argoz, the Lord Mavramorn, the
Lord Octesian, the Lord Restimar, and--oh, that other one who's so hard
to remember."

"The Lord Rhoop, Sire," said Drinian.

"Rhoop, Rhoop, of course," said Caspian.  "That is my main intention.
But Reepicheep here has an even higher hope."  Everyone's eyes turned
to the Mouse.

"As high as my spirit," it said.  "Though perhaps as small as my
stature.  Why should we not come to the very eastern end of the world?
And what might we find there?  I expect to find Aslan's own country.
It is always from the east, across the sea, that the great Lion comes
to us."

"I say, that _is_ an idea," said Edmund in an awed voice.

"But do you think," said Lucy, "Aslan's country would be that sort of
country--I mean, the sort you could ever _sail_ to?"

"I do not know, Madam," said Reepicheep.  "But there is this.  When I
was in my cradle a wood woman, a Dryad, spoke this verse over me:

  "Where sky and water meet,
  Where the waves grow sweet,
  Doubt not, Reepicheep,
  To find all you seek,
  There is the utter East.


"I do not know what it means.  But the spell of it has been on me all
my life."

After a short silence Lucy asked, "And where are we now, Caspian?"

"The Captain can tell you better than I," said Caspian, so Drinian got
out his chart and spread it on the table.

"That's our position," he said, laying his finger on it.  "Or was at
noon to-day.  We had a fair wind from Cair Paravel and stood a little
north for Galma, which we made on the next day.  We were in port for a
week, for the Duke of Galma made a great tournament for His Majesty and
there he unhorsed many knights----"

"And got a few nasty falls myself, Drinian.  Some of the bruises are
there still," put in Caspian.

"--And unhorsed many knights," repeated Drinian with a grin.  "We
thought the Duke would have been pleased if the King's Majesty would
have married his daughter, but nothing came of that----"

"Squints, and has freckles," said Caspian.

"Oh, poor girl," said Lucy.

"And we sailed from Galma," continued Drinian, "and ran into a calm for
the best of two days and had to row, and then had wind again and did
not make Terebinthia till the fourth day from Galma.  And there their
King sent out a warning not to land for there was sickness in
Terebinthia, but we doubled the cape and put in at a little creek far
from the city and watered.  Then we had to lie off for three days
before we got a south-east wind and stood out for Seven Isles.  The
third day out a pirate (Terebinthian by her rig) overhauled us, but
when she saw us well armed she stood off after some shooting of arrows
on either part----"

"And we ought to have given her chase and boarded her and hanged every
mother's son of them," said Reepicheep.

"--And in five days more we were in sight of Muil which, as you know,
is the westernmost of the Seven Isles.  Then we rowed through the
straits and came about sundown into Redhaven on the isle of Brenn,
where we were very lovingly feasted and had victual and water at will.
We left Redhaven six days ago and have made marvellously good speed, so
that I hope to see the Lone Islands the day after to-morrow.  The sum
is, we are now nearly thirty days at sea and have sailed more than four
hundred leagues from Narnia."

"And after the Lone Islands?" said Lucy.

"No one knows, your Majesty," answered Drinian.  "Unless the Lone
Islanders themselves can tell us."

"They couldn't in our days," said Edmund.

"Then," said Reepicheep, "it is after the Lone Islands that the
adventure really begins."

Caspian now suggested that they might like to be shown over the ship
before supper, but Lucy's conscience smote her and she said, "I think I
really must go and see Eustace.  Seasickness is horrid, you know.  If I
had my old cordial with me I could cure him."

"But you have," said Caspian.  "I'd quite forgotten about it.  As you
left it behind I thought it might be regarded as one of the royal
treasures and so I brought it--if you think it ought to be wasted on a
thing like seasickness."

"It'll only take a drop," said Lucy.

Caspian opened one of the lockers beneath the bench and brought out the
beautiful little diamond flask which Lucy remembered so well.  "Take
back your own, Queen," he said.  They then left the cabin and went out
into the sunshine.

In the deck there were two large, long hatches, fore and aft of the
mast, and both open, as they always were in fair weather, to let light
and air into the belly of the ship.  Caspian led them down a ladder
into the after hatch.  Here they found themselves in a place where
benches for rowing ran from side to side and the light came in through
the oar-holes and danced on the roof.  Of course Caspian's ship was not
that horrible thing, a galley rowed by slaves.  Oars were used only
when wind failed or for getting in and out of harbour and everyone
(except Reepicheep whose legs were too short) had often taken a turn.
At each side of the ship the space under the benches was left clear for
the rowers' feet, but all down the centre there was a kind of pit which
went down to the very keel and this was filled with all kinds of
things--sacks of flour, casks of water and beer, barrels of pork, jars
of honey, skin bottles of wine, apples, nuts, cheeses, biscuits,
turnips, sides of bacon.  From the roof--that is, from the under side
of the deck--hung hams and strings of onions, and also the men of the
watch off-duty in their hammocks.  Caspian led them aft, stepping from
bench to bench; at least, it was stepping for him, and something
between a step and a jump for Lucy, and a real long jump for
Reepicheep.  In this way they came to a partition with a door in it.
Caspian opened the door and led them into a cabin which filled the
stern underneath the deck cabins in the poop.  It was of course not so
nice.  It was very low and the sides sloped together as they went down
so that there was hardly any floor; and though it had windows of thick
glass, they were not made to open because they were under water.  In
fact at this very moment, as the ship pitched they were alternately
golden with sunlight and dim green with the sea.

"You and I must lodge here, Edmund," said Caspian.  "We'll leave your
kinsman the bunk and sling hammocks for ourselves."

"I beseech your Majesty----" said Drinian.

"No, no, shipmate," said Caspian, "we have argued all that out already.
You and Rhince" (Rhince was the mate) "are sailing the ship and will
have cares and labours many a night when we are singing catches or
telling stories, so you and he must have the port cabin above.  King
Edmund and I can lie very snug here below.  But how is the stranger?"

Eustace, very green in the face, scowled and asked whether there was
any sign of the storm getting less.  But Caspian said, "What storm?"
and Drinian burst out laughing.

"Storm, young master!" he roared.  "This is as fair weather as a man
could ask for."

"Who's that?" said Eustace irritably.  "Send him away.  His voice goes
through my head."

"I've brought you something that will make you feel better, Eustace,"
said Lucy.

"Oh, go away and leave me alone," growled Eustace.  But he took a drop
from her flask, and though he said it was beastly stuff (the smell in
the cabin when she opened it was delicious) it is certain that his face
came the right colour a few moments after he had swallowed it, and he
must have felt better because, instead of wailing about the storm and
his head, he began demanding to be put ashore and said that at the
first port he would "lodge a disposition" against them all with the
British Consul.  But when Reepicheep asked what a disposition was and
how you lodged it (Reepicheep thought it was some new way of arranging
a single combat) Eustace could only reply, "Fancy not knowing that."
In the end they succeeded in convincing Eustace that they were already
sailing as fast as they could towards the nearest land they knew, and
that they had no more power of sending him back to Cambridge--which was
where Uncle Harold lived--than of sending him to the moon.  After that
he sulkily agreed to put on the fresh clothes which had been put out
for him and come on deck.

Caspian now showed them over the ship, though indeed they had seen most
of it already.  They went up on the forecastle and saw the look-out man
standing on a little shelf inside the gilded dragon's neck and peering
through its open mouth.  Inside the forecastle was the galley (or
ship's kitchen) and quarters for such people as the boatswain, the
carpenter, the cook and the master-archer.  If you think it odd to have
the galley in the bows and imagine the smoke from its chimney streaming
back over the ship, that is because you are thinking of steamships
where there is always a headwind.  On a sailing ship the wind is coming
from behind, and anything smelly is put as far forward as possible.
They were taken up to the fighting top, and at first it was rather
alarming to rock to and fro there and see the deck looking small and
far away beneath.  You realised that if you fell there was no
particular reason why you should fall on board rather than in the sea.
Then they were taken to the poop, where Rhince was on duty with another
man at the great tiller, and behind that the dragon's tail rose up,
covered with gilding, and round inside it ran a little bench.  The name
of the ship was _Dawn Treader_.  She was only a little bit of a thing
compared with one of our ships, or even with the cogs, dromonds,
carracks and galleons which Narnia had owned when Lucy and Edmund had
reigned there under Peter as the High King, for nearly all navigation
had died out in the reigns of Caspian's ancestors.  When his uncle,
Miraz the usurper, had sent the seven lords to sea, they had had to buy
a Galmian ship and man it with hired Galmian sailors.  But now Caspian
had begun to teach the Narnians to be once more sea-faring folk, and
the _Dawn Treader_ was the finest ship he had built yet.  She was so
small that, forward of the mast, there was hardly any deck room between
the central hatch and the ship's boat on one side and the hen-coop
(Lucy fed the hens) on the other.  But she was a beauty of her kind, a
"lady" as sailors say, her lines perfect, her colours pure, and every
spar and rope and pin lovingly made.  Eustace of course would be
pleased with nothing, and kept on boasting about liners and motor-boats
and aeroplanes and submarines ("As if _he_ knew anything about them,"
muttered Edmund), but the other two were delighted with the _Dawn
Treader_, and when they turned aft to the cabin and supper, and saw the
whole western sky lit up with an immense crimson sunset, and felt the
quiver of the ship, and tasted the salt on their lips, and thought of
unknown lands on the Eastern rim of the world, Lucy felt that she was
almost too happy to speak.

What Eustace thought had best be told in his own words, for when they
all got their clothes back, dried, next morning, he at once got out a
little black notebook and a pencil and started to keep a diary.  He
always had this notebook with him and kept a record of his marks in it,
for though he didn't care much about any subject for its own sake, he
cared a great deal about marks and would even go to people and say, "I
got so much.  What did you get?"  But as he didn't seem likely to get
many marks on the _Dawn Treader_ he now started a diary.  This was the
first entry.


"_August 7th_.  Have now been 24 hours on this ghastly boat if it isn't
a dream.  All the time a frightful storm has been raging (it's a good
thing I'm not seasick).  Huge waves keep coming in over the front and I
have seen the boat nearly go under any number of times.  All the others
pretend to take no notice of this, either from swank or because Harold
says one of the most cowardly things ordinary people do is to shut
their eyes to Facts.  It's madness to come out into the sea in a rotten
little thing like this.  Not much bigger than a lifeboat.  And, of
course, absolutely primitive indoors.  No proper saloon, no radio, no
bathrooms, no deck-chairs.  I was dragged all over it yesterday evening
and it would make anyone sick to hear Caspian showing off his funny
little toy boat as if it was the _Queen Mary_.  I tried to tell him
what real ships are like, but he's too dense.  E. and L., _of course_,
didn't back me up.  I suppose a kid like L. doesn't realise the danger
and E. is buttering up C. as everyone does here.  They call him a King.
I said I was a Republican but he had to ask me what that meant!  He
doesn't seem to know anything at all.  _Needless to say_ I've been put
in the worst cabin of the boat, a perfect dungeon, and Lucy has been
given a whole room on deck to herself, almost a nice room compared with
the rest of this place.  C. says that's because she's a girl.  I tried
to make him see what Alberta says, that all that sort of thing is
really lowering girls but he was too dense.  Still, he might see that I
shall be ill if I'm kept in that _hole_ any longer.  E. says we mustn't
grumble because C. is sharing it with us himself to make room for L.
As if that didn't make it more crowded and far worse.  Nearly forgot to
say that there is also a kind of Mouse thing that gives everyone the
most frightful cheek.  The others can put up with it if they like but I
shall twist his tail pretty soon if he tries it on me.  The food is
frightful too."


The trouble between Eustace and Reepicheep arrived even sooner than
might have been expected.  Before dinner next day, when the others were
sitting round the table waiting (being at sea gives one a magnificent
appetite), Eustace came rushing in, wringing his hand and shouting out:

"That little brute has half killed me.  I insist on it being kept under
control.  I could bring an action against you, Caspian.  I could order
you to have it destroyed."

At the same moment Reepicheep appeared.  His sword was drawn and his
whiskers looked very fierce but he was as polite as ever.

"I ask your pardons all," he said, "and especially her Majesty's.  If I
had known that he would take refuge here I would have awaited a more
reasonable time for his correction."

"What on earth's up?" asked Edmund.

What had really happened was this.  Reepicheep, who never felt that the
ship was getting on fast enough, loved to sit on the bulwarks far
forward just beside the dragon's head, gazing out at the eastern
horizon and singing softly in his little chirruping voice the song the
Dryad had made for him.  He never held on to anything, however the ship
pitched, and kept his balance with perfect ease; perhaps his long tail,
hanging down to the deck inside the bulwarks, made this easier.
Everyone on board was familiar with this habit, and the sailors liked
it because when one was on look-out duty it gave one somebody to talk
to.  Why exactly Eustace had slipped and reeled and stumbled all the
way forward to the forecastle (he had not yet got his sea-legs) I never
heard.  Perhaps he hoped he would see land, or perhaps he wanted to
hang about the galley and scrounge something.  Anyway, as soon as he
saw that long tail hanging down--and perhaps it was rather tempting--he
thought it would be delightful to catch hold of it, swing Reepicheep
round by it once or twice upside-down, then run away and laugh.  At
first the plan seemed to work beautifully.  The Mouse was not much
heavier than a very large cat.  Eustace had him off the rail in a trice
and very silly he looked (thought Eustace) with his little limbs all
splayed out and his mouth open.  But unfortunately Reepicheep, who had
fought for his life many a time, never lost his head even for a moment.
Nor his skill.  It is not very easy to draw one's sword when one is
swinging round in the air by one's tail, but he did.  And the next
thing Eustace knew was two agonising jabs in his hand which made him
let go of the tail; and the next thing after that was that the Mouse
had picked itself up again as if it were a ball bouncing off the deck,
and there it was facing him, and a horrid long, bright, sharp thing
like a skewer was waving to and fro within an inch of his stomach.
(This doesn't count as below the belt for mice in Narnia because they
can hardly be expected to reach higher.)

"Stop it," spluttered Eustace, "go away.  Put that thing away.  It's
not safe.  Stop it, I say.  I'll tell Caspian.  I'll have you muzzled
and tied up."

"Why do you not draw your own sword, poltroon!" cheeped the Mouse.
"Draw and fight or I'll beat you black and blue with the flat."

"I haven't got one," said Eustace.  "I'm a pacifist.  I don't believe
in fighting."

"Do I understand," said Reepicheep, withdrawing his sword for a moment
and speaking very sternly, "that you do not intend to give me
satisfaction?"

"I don't know what you mean," said Eustace, nursing his hand.  "If you
don't know how to take a joke I shan't bother my head about you."

"Then take that," said Reepicheep, "and that--to teach you manners--and
the respect due to a knight--and a Mouse--and a Mouse's tail----" and
at each word he gave Eustace a blow with the side of his rapier, which
was thin, fine dwarf-tempered steel and as supple and effective as a
birch rod.  Eustace (of course) was at a school where they didn't have
corporal punishment, so the sensation was quite new to him.  That was
why, in spite of having no sea-legs, it took him less than a minute to
get off that forecastle and cover the whole length of the deck and
burst in at the cabin door--still hotly pursued by Reepicheep.  Indeed
it seemed to Eustace that the rapier as well as the pursuit was hot.
It might have been red-hot by the feel.

There was not much difficulty in settling the matter once Eustace
realised that everyone took the idea of a duel quite seriously and
heard Caspian offering to lend him a sword, and Drinian and Edmund
discussing whether he ought to be handicapped in some way to make up
for his being so much bigger than Reepicheep.  He apologised sulkily
and went off with Lucy to have his hand bathed and bandaged and then
went to his bunk.  He was careful to lie on his side.




_Chapter III_

THE LONE ISLANDS

"Land in sight," shouted the man in the bows.

Lucy, who had been talking to Rhince on the poop, came pattering down
the ladder and raced forward.  As she went she was joined by Edmund,
and they found Caspian, Drinian and Reepicheep already on the
forecastle.  It was a coldish morning, the sky very pale and the sea
very dark blue with little white caps of foam, and there, a little way
off on the starboard bow, was the nearest of the Lone Islands,
Felimath, like a low green hill in the sea, and behind it, further off,
the grey slopes of its sister Doorn.

"Same old Felimath!  Same old Doorn," said Lucy, clapping her hands.
"Oh--Edmund, how long it is since you and I saw them last!"

"I've never understood why they belong to Narnia," said Caspian.  "Did
Peter the High King conquer them?"

"Oh no," said Edmund.  "They were Narnian before our time--in the days
of the White Witch."

(By the way, I have never yet heard how these remote islands became
attached to the crown of Narnia; if I ever do, and if the story is at
all interesting, I may put it in some other book.)

"Are we to put in here, Sire?" asked Drinian.

"I shouldn't think it would be much good landing on Felimath," said
Edmund.  "It was almost uninhabited in our days and it looks as if it
was the same still.  The people lived mostly on Doorn and a little on
Avra--that's the third one; you can't see it yet.  They only kept sheep
on Felimath."

"Then we'll have to double that cape, I suppose," said Drinian, "and
land on Doorn.  That'll mean rowing."

"I'm sorry we're not landing on Felimath," said Lucy.  "I'd like to
walk there again.  It was so lonely--a nice kind of loneliness, and all
grass and clover and soft sea air."

"I'd love to stretch my legs too," said Caspian.  "I tell you what.
Why shouldn't we go ashore in the boat and send it back, and then we
could walk across Felimath and let the _Dawn Treader_ pick us up on the
other side?"

If Caspian had been as experienced then as he became later on in this
voyage he would not have made this suggestion; but at the moment it
seemed an excellent one.  "Oh do let's," said Lucy.

"You'll come, will you?" said Caspian to Eustace, who had come on deck
with his hand bandaged.

"Anything to get off this blasted boat," said Eustace.

"Blasted?" said Drinian.  "How do you mean?"

"In a civilised country like where I come from," said Eustace, "the
ships are so big that when you're inside you wouldn't know you were at
sea at all."

"In that case you might just as well stay ashore," said Caspian.  "Will
you tell them to lower the boat, Drinian."

The King, the Mouse, the two Pevensies, and Eustace all got into the
boat and were pulled to the beach of Felimath.  When the boat had left
them and was being rowed back they all turned and looked round.  They
were surprised at how small the _Dawn Treader_ looked.

Lucy was of course barefoot, having kicked off her shoes while
swimming, but that is no hardship if one is going to walk on downy
turf.  It was delightful to be ashore again and to smell the earth and
grass, even if at first the ground seemed to be pitching up and down
like a ship, as it usually does for a while if one has been at sea.  It
was much warmer here than it had been on board and Lucy found the sand
pleasant to her feet as they crossed it.  There was a lark singing.

They struck inland and up a fairly steep, though low, hill.  At the top
of course they looked back, and there was the _Dawn Treader_ shining
like a great bright insect and crawling slowly north-westward with her
oars.  Then they went over the ridge and could see her no longer.

Doorn now lay before them, divided from Felimath by a channel about a
mile wide; behind it and to the left lay Avra.  The little white town
of Narrowhaven on Doorn was easily seen.

"Hullo!  What's this?" said Edmund suddenly.

In the green valley to which they were descending six or seven
rough-looking men, all armed, were sitting by a tree.

"Don't tell them who we are," said Caspian.

"And pray, your Majesty, why not?" said Reepicheep who had consented to
ride on Lucy's shoulder.

"It just occurred to me," replied Caspian, "that no one here can have
heard from Narnia for a long time.  It's just possible they may not
still acknowledge our over-lordship.  In which case it might not be
quite safe to be known as the King."

"We have our swords, Sire," said Reepicheep.

"Yes, Reep, I know we have," said Caspian.  "But if it is a question of
re-conquering the three islands, I'd prefer to come back with a rather
larger army."

By this time they were quite close to the strangers, one of whom--a big
black-haired fellow--shouted out, "A good morning to you."

"And a good morning to you," said Caspian.  "Is there still a Governor
of the Lone Islands?"

"To be sure there is," said the man, "Governor Gumpas.  His Sufficiency
is at Narrowhaven.  But you'll stay and drink with us."

Caspian thanked him, though neither he nor the others much liked the
look of their new acquaintance, and all of them sat down.  But hardly
had they raised their cups to their lips when the black-haired man
nodded to his companions and, as quick as lightning, all the five
visitors found themselves wrapped in strong arms.  There was a moment's
struggle but all the advantages were on one side, and soon everyone was
disarmed and had their hands tied behind their backs--except
Reepicheep, writhing in his captor's grip and biting furiously.

"Careful with that beast, Tacks," said the Leader.  "Don't damage him.
He'll fetch the best price of the lot, I shouldn't wonder."

"Coward!  Poltroon!" squeaked Reepicheep.  "Give me my sword and free
my paws if you dare."

"Whew!" whistled the slave merchant (for that is what he was).  "It can
talk!  Well I never did.  Blowed if I take less than two hundred
crescents for him."  The Calormen crescent, which is the chief coin in
those parts, is worth about a third of a pound.

"So that's what you are," said Caspian.  "A kidnapper and slaver.  I
hope you're proud of it."

"Now, now, now, now," said the slaver.  "Don't you start any jaw.  The
easier you take it, the pleasanter all round, see?  I don't do this for
fun.  I've got my living to make same as anyone else."

"Where will you take us?" asked Lucy, getting the words out with some
difficulty.

"Over to Narrowhaven," said the slaver.  "For market to-morrow."

"Is there a British Consul there?" asked Eustace.

"Is there a which?" said the man.

But long before Eustace was tired of trying to explain, the slaver
simply said, "Well, I've had enough of this jabber.  The Mouse is a
fair treat but this one would talk the hind leg off a donkey.  Off we
go, mates."

Then the four human prisoners were roped together, not cruelly but
securely, and made to march down to the shore.  Reepicheep was carried.
He had stopped biting on a threat of having his mouth tied up, but he
had a great deal to say, and Lucy really wondered how any man could
bear to have the things said to him which were said to the slave dealer
by the Mouse.  But the slave dealer, far from objecting, only said "Go
on" whenever Reepicheep paused for breath, occasionally adding, "It's
as good as a play", or, "Blimey, you can't help almost thinking it
knows what it's saying!" or "Was it one of you what trained it?"  This
so infuriated Reepicheep that in the end the number of things he
thought of saying all at once nearly suffocated him and he became
silent.

When they got down to the shore that looked towards Doorn they found a
little village and a long-boat on the beach and, lying a little further
out, a dirty bedraggled looking ship.

"Now, youngsters," said the slave dealer, "let's have no fuss and then
you'll have nothing to cry about.  All aboard."

At that moment a fine-looking bearded man came out of one of the houses
(an inn, I think) and said:

"Well, Pug.  More of your usual wares?"

The slaver, whose name seemed to be Pug, bowed very low, and said in a
wheedling kind of voice, "Yes, please your Lordship."

"How much do you want for that boy?" asked the other, pointing to
Caspian.

"Ah," said Pug, "I knew your Lordship would pick on the best.  No
deceiving your Lordship with anything second rate.  That boy, now, I've
taken a fancy to him myself.  Got kind of fond of him, I have.  I'm
that tender-hearted I didn't ever ought to have taken up this job.
Still, to a customer like your Lordship----"

"Tell me your price, carrion," said the Lord sternly.  "Do you think I
want to listen to the rigmarole of your filthy trade?"

"Three hundred crescents, my Lord, to your honourable Lordship, but to
anyone else----"

"I'll give you a hundred and fifty."

"Oh please, please," broke in Lucy.  "Don't separate us, whatever you
do.  You don't know----"  But then she stopped for she saw that Caspian
didn't even now want to be known.

"A hundred and fifty, then," said the Lord.  "As for you, little
maiden, I am sorry I cannot buy you all.  Unrope my boy, Pug.  And
look--treat these others well while they are in your hands or it'll be
the worse for you."

"Well!" said Pug.  "Now who ever heard of a gentleman in my way of
business who treated his stock better than what I do?  Well?  Why, I
treat 'em like my own children."

"That's likely enough to be true," said the other grimly.

The dreadful moment had now come.  Caspian was untied and his new
master said, "This way, lad," and Lucy burst into tears and Edmund
looked very blank.  But Caspian looked over his shoulder and said,
"Cheer up.  I'm sure it will come all right in the end.  So long."

"Now, missie," said Pug.  "Don't you start taking on and spoiling your
looks for the market to-morrow.  You be a good girl and then you won't
have nothing to cry about, see?"

Then they were rowed out to the slave-ship and taken below into a long,
rather dark place, none too clean, where they found many other
unfortunate prisoners; for Pug was of course a pirate and had just
returned from cruising among the islands and capturing what he could.
The children didn't meet anyone whom they knew; the prisoners were
mostly Galmians and Terebinthians.  And there they sat in the straw and
wondered what was happening to Caspian and tried to stop Eustace
talking as if everyone except himself was to blame.

Meanwhile Caspian was having a much more interesting time.  The man who
had bought him led him down a little lane between two of the village
houses and so out into an open place behind the village.  Then he
turned and faced him.

"You needn't be afraid of me, boy," he said.  "I'll treat you well.  I
bought you for your face.  You reminded me of someone."

"May I ask of whom, my Lord?" said Caspian.

"You remind me of my master, King Caspian of Narnia."

Then Caspian decided to risk everything on one stroke.

"My Lord," he said, "I am your master.  I am Caspian, King of Narnia."

"You make very free," said the other.  "How shall I know this is true?"

"Firstly by my face," said Caspian.  "Secondly because I know within
six guesses who you are.  You are one of those seven lords of Narnia
whom my Uncle Miraz sent to sea and whom I have come out to look
for--Argoz, Bern, Octesian, Restimar, Mavramorn, or--or--I have
forgotten the other.  And finally, if your Lordship will give me a
sword I will prove on any man's body in clean battle that I am Caspian
the son of Caspian, lawful king of Narnia, Lord of Cair Paravel, and
Emperor of the Lone Islands."

"By heaven," exclaimed the man, "it is his father's very voice and
trick of speech.  My liege--your majesty----"  And there in the field
he knelt and kissed the King's hand.

"The moneys your Lordship disbursed for our person will be made good
from our own treasury," said Caspian.

"They're not in Pug's purse yet, Sire," said the Lord Bern, for he it
was.  "And never will be, I trust.  I have moved his Sufficiency the
Governor a hundred times to crush this vile traffic in man's flesh."

"My Lord Bern," said Caspian, "we must talk of the state of these
Islands.  But first what is your Lordship's own story?"

"Short enough, Sire," said Bern.  "I came thus far with my six fellows,
loved a girl of the islands, and felt I had had enough of the sea.  And
there was no purpose in returning to Narnia while your Majesty's uncle
held the reins.  So I married and have lived here ever since."

"And what is this governor, this Gumpas, like?  Does he still
acknowledge the King of Narnia for his lord?"

"In words, yes.  All is done in the King's name.  But he would not be
best pleased to find a real, live King of Narnia coming in upon him.
And if your Majesty came before him alone and unarmed--well he would
not deny his allegiance, but he would pretend to disbelieve you.  Your
Grace's life would be in danger.  What following has your Majesty in
these waters?"

"There is my ship just rounding the point," said Caspian.  "We are
about thirty swords if it came to fighting.  Shall we not have my ship
in and fall upon Pug and free my friends whom he holds captive?"

"Not by my counsel," said Bern.  "As soon as there was a fight two or
three ships would put out from Narrowhaven to rescue Pug.  Your Majesty
must work by a show of more power than you really have, and by the
terror of the King's name.  It must not come to plain battle.  Gumpas
is a chicken-hearted man and can be over-awed."

After a little more conversation Caspian and Bern walked down to the
coast a little west of the village and there Caspian winded his horn.
(This was not the great magic horn of Narnia, Queen Susan's Horn: he
had left that at home for his regent Trumpkin to use if any great need
fell upon the land in the King's absence.)  Drinian, who was on the
look-out for a signal, recognised the royal horn at once and the _Dawn
Treader_ began standing in to shore.  Then the boat put off again and
in a few moments Caspian and the Lord Bern were on deck explaining the
situation to Drinian.  He, just like Caspian, wanted to lay the _Dawn
Treader_ alongside the slave-ship at once and board her, but Bern made
the same objection.

"Steer straight down this channel, captain," said Bern, "and then round
to Avra where my own estates are.  But first run up the King's banner,
hang out all the shields, and send as many men to the fighting top as
you can.  And about five bowshots hence, when you get open sea on your
port bow, run up a few signals."

"Signals?  To whom?" said Drinian.

"Why, to all the other ships we haven't got but which it might be well
that Gumpas thinks we have."

"Oh, I see," said Drinian, rubbing his hands.  "And they'll read our
signals.  What shall I say?  _Whole fleet found the South of Avra and
assemble at----_?"

"Bernstead," said the Lord Bern.  "That'll do excellently.  Their whole
journey--if _there_ were any ships--would be out of sight from
Narrowhaven."

Caspian was sorry for the others languishing in the hold of Pug's slave
ship, but he could not help finding the rest of that day enjoyable.
Late in the afternoon (for they had to do all by oar), having turned to
starboard round the north-east end of Doorn and port again round the
point of Avra, they entered into a good harbour on Avra's southern
shore where Bern's pleasant lands sloped down to the water's edge.
Bern's people, many of whom they saw working in the fields, were all
freemen and it was a happy and prosperous fief.  Here they all went
ashore and were royally feasted in a low, pillared house overlooking
the bay.  Bern and his gracious wife and merry daughters made them good
cheer.  But after dark Bern sent a messenger over by boat to Doorn to
order some preparations (he did not say exactly what) for the following
day.




_Chapter IV_

WHAT CASPIAN DID THERE

Next morning the Lord Bern called his guests early and after breakfast
he asked Caspian to order every man he had into full armour.  "And
above all," he added, "let everything be as trim and scoured as if it
were the morning of the first battle in a great war between noble kings
with all the world looking on."  This was done; and then in three
boat-loads, Caspian and his people, and Bern with a few of his, put out
for Narrowhaven.  The king's flag flew in the stern of his boat and his
trumpeter was with him.

When they reached the jetty at Narrowhaven, Caspian found a
considerable crowd assembled to meet them.  "This is what I sent word
about last night," said Bern.  "They are all friends of mine and honest
people."  And as soon as Caspian stepped ashore the crowd broke out
into hurrahs and shouts of, "Narnia!  Narnia!  Long live the king."  At
the same moment--and this was also due to Bern's messengers--bells
began ringing from many parts of the town.  Then Caspian caused his
banner to be advanced and his trumpet to blow and every man drew his
sword and set his face into a joyful sternness, and they marched up the
street so that the street shook, and their armour shone (for it was a
sunny morning) so that one could hardly look at it steadily.

At first the only people who cheered were those who had been warned by
Bern's messenger and knew what was happening and wanted it to happen.
But then all the children joined in because they liked a procession and
had seen very few.  And then all the schoolboys joined in because they
also liked processions and felt that the more noise and disturbance
there was the less likely they would be to have any school that
morning.  And then all the old women put their heads out of doors and
windows and began chattering and cheering because it was a king, and
what is a governor compared with that?  And all the young women joined
in for the same reason and also because Caspian and Drinian and the
rest were so handsome.  And then all the young men came to see what the
young women were looking at, so that by the time Caspian reached the
castle gates, nearly the whole town was shouting; and where Gumpas sat
in the castle, muddling and messing about with accounts and forms and
rules and regulations, he heard the noise.

At the castle gate Caspian's trumpeter blew a blast and cried, "Open
for the king of Narnia, come to visit his trusty and well-beloved
servant the governor of the Lone Islands."  In those days everything in
the islands was done in a slovenly, slouching manner.  Only the little
postern opened and out came a tousled fellow with a dirty old hat on
his head instead of a helmet, and a rusty old pike in his hand.  He
blinked at the flashing figures before him.  "Cam--seez--fishansy," he
mumbled (which was his way of saying, "You can't see his Sufficiency").
"No interviews without 'pointments 'cept 'tween nine 'n' ten p.m.
second Saturday every month."

"Uncover before Narnia, you dog," thundered the Lord Bern, and dealt
him a rap with his gauntleted hand which sent his hat flying from his
head.

"'Ere?  Wot's it all about?" began the doorkeeper, but no one took any
notice of him.  Two of Caspian's men stepped through the postern and
after some struggling with bars and bolts (for everything was rusty)
flung both wings of the gate wide open.  Then the king and his
followers strode into the courtyard.  Here a number of the governor's
guards were lounging about and several more (they were mostly wiping
their mouths) came tumbling out of various doorways.  Though their
armour was in a disgraceful condition, these were fellows who might
have fought if they had been led or had known what was happening; so
this was the dangerous moment.  Caspian gave them no time to think.

"Where is the captain?" he asked.

"I am, more or less, if you know what I mean," said a languid and
rather dandified young person without any armour at all.

"It is our wish," said Caspian, "that our royal visitation to our realm
of the Lone Islands should, if possible, be an occasion of joy and not
of terror to our loyal subjects.  If it were not for that, I should
have something to say about the state of your men's armour and weapons.
As it is, you are pardoned.  Command a cask of wine to be opened that
your men may drink our health.  But at noon to-morrow I wish to see
them here in this courtyard looking like men at arms and not like
vagabonds.  See to it on pain of our extreme displeasure."

The captain gaped but Bern immediately cried, "Three cheers for the
king", and the soldiers, who had understood about the cask of wine even
if they understood nothing else, joined in.  Caspian then ordered most
of his own men to remain in the courtyard.  He, with Bern and Drinian
and four others, went into the hall.

Behind a table at the far end with various secretaries about him sat
his Sufficiency, the governor of the Lone Islands.  Gumpas was a
bilious looking man with hair that had once been red and was now mostly
grey.  He glanced up as the strangers entered and then looked down at
his papers saying automatically, "No interviews without appointments
except between nine and ten p.m. on second Saturdays."

Caspian nodded to Bern and then stood aside.  Bern and Drinian took a
step forward and each seized one end of the table.  They lifted it, and
flung it on one side of the hall where it rolled over, scattering a
cascade of letters, dossiers, ink-pots, pens, sealing-wax and
documents.  Then, not roughly but as firmly as if their hands were
pincers of steel, they plucked Gumpas out of his chair and deposited
him, facing it, about four feet away.  Caspian at once sat down in the
chair and laid his naked sword across his knees.

"My Lord," said he, fixing his eyes on Gumpas, "you have not given us
quite the welcome we expected.  We are the King of Narnia."

"Nothing about it in the correspondence," said the governor.  "Nothing
in the minutes.  We have not been notified of any such thing.  All
irregular.  Happy to consider any applications----"

"And we are come to inquire into your Sufficiency's conduct of your
office," continued Caspian.  "There are two points especially on which
I require an explanation.  Firstly I find no record that the tribute
due from these Islands to the crown of Narnia has been received for
about a hundred and fifty years."

"That would be a question to raise at the Council next month," said
Gumpas.  "If anyone moves that a commission of inquiry be set up to
report on the financial history of the islands at the first meeting
next year, why then..."

"I also find it very clearly written in our laws," Caspian went on,
"that if the tribute is not delivered the whole debt has to be paid by
the governor of the Lone Islands out of his private purse."

At this Gumpas began to pay real attention.  "Oh, that's quite out of
the question," he said.  "It is an economic impossibility--er--your
Majesty must be joking."

Inside, he was wondering if there were any way of getting rid of these
unwelcome visitors.  Had he known that Caspian had only one ship and
one ship's company with him, he would have spoken soft words for the
moment, and hoped to have them all surrounded and killed during the
night.  But he had seen a ship of war sail down the straits yesterday
and seen it signalling, as he supposed, to its consorts.  He had not
then known it was the king's ship for there was not wind enough to
spread the flag out and make the golden lion visible, so he had waited
further developments.  Now he imagined that Caspian had a whole fleet
at Bernstead.  It would never have occurred to Gumpas that anyone would
walk into Narrowhaven to take the islands with less than fifty men; it
was certainly not at all the kind of thing he could imagine doing
himself.

"Secondly," said Caspian, "I want to know why you have permitted this
abominable and unnatural traffic in slaves to grow up here, contrary to
the ancient custom and usage of our dominions."

"Necessary, unavoidable," said his Sufficiency.  "An essential part of
the economic development of the islands, I assure you.  Our present
burst of prosperity depends on it."

"What need have you of slaves?"

"For export, your Majesty.  Sell 'em to Calormen mostly; and we have
other markets.  We are a great centre of the trade."

"In other words," said Caspian, "you don't need them.  Tell me what
purpose they serve except to put money into the pockets of such as Pug?"

"Your Majesty's tender years," said Gumpas, with what was meant to be a
fatherly smile, "hardly make it possible that you should understand the
economic problem involved.  I have statistics, I have graphs, I
have----"

"Tender as my years may be," said Caspian, "I believe I understand the
slave trade from within quite as well as your Sufficiency.  And I do
not see that it brings into the islands meat or bread or beer or wine
or timber or cabbages or books or instruments of music or horses or
armour or anything else worth having.  But whether it does or not, it
must be stopped."

"But that would be putting the clock back," gasped the governor.  "Have
you no idea of progress, of development?"

"I have seen them both in an egg," said Caspian.  "We call it Going Bad
in Narnia.  This trade must stop."

"I can take no responsibility for any such measure," said Gumpas.

"Very well, then," answered Caspian, "we relieve you of your office.
My Lord Bern, come here."  And before Gumpas quite realised what was
happening, Bern was kneeling with his hands between the King's hands
and taking the oath to govern the Lone Islands in accordance with the
old customs, rights, usages and laws of Narnia.  And Caspian said, "I
think we have had enough of governors," and made Bern a Duke, the Duke
of the Lone Islands.

"As for you, my Lord," he said to Gumpas, "I forgive you your debt for
the tribute.  But before noon to-morrow you and yours must be out of
the castle, which is now the Duke's residence."

"Look here, this is all very well," said one of Gumpas's secretaries,
"but suppose all you gentlemen stop play-acting and we do a little
business.  The question before us really is----"

"The question is," said the Duke, "whether you and the rest of the
rabble will leave without a flogging or with one.  You may choose which
you prefer."

When all this had been pleasantly settled, Caspian ordered horses, of
which there were a few in the castle, though very ill groomed, and he
with Bern and Drinian and a few others rode out into the town and made
for the slave market.  It was a long low building near the harbour and
the scene which they found going on inside was very much like any other
auction; that is to say, there was a great crowd and Pug, on a
platform, was roaring out in a raucous voice:

"Now, gentlemen, lot twenty-three.  Fine Terebinthian agricultural
labourer, suitable for the mines or the galleys.  Under twenty-five
years of age.  Not a bad tooth in his head.  Good, brawny fellow.  Take
off his shirt, Tacks, and let the gentlemen see.  There's muscle for
you!  Look at the chest on him.  Ten crescents from the gentleman in
the corner.  You must be joking, sir.  Fifteen!  Eighteen!  Eighteen is
bidden for lot twenty-three.  Any advance on eighteen?  Twenty-one.
Thank you, sir.  Twenty-one is bidden----"

But Pug stopped and gaped when he saw the mail-clad figures who had
clanked up to the platform.

"On your knees, every man of you, to the King of Narnia," said the
Duke.  Everyone heard the horses jingling and stamping outside and many
had heard some rumour of the landing and the events at the castle.
Most obeyed.  Those who did not were pulled down by their neighbours.
Some cheered.

"Your life is forfeit, Pug, for laying hands on our royal person
yesterday," said Caspian.  "But your ignorance is pardoned.  The slave
trade was forbidden in all our dominions quarter of an hour ago.  I
declare every slave in this market free."

He held up his hand to check the cheering of the slaves and went on,
"Where are my friends?"

"That dear little gel and the nice young gentleman?" said Pug with an
ingratiating smile.  "Why, they were snapped up at once----"

"We're here, we're here, Caspian," cried Lucy and Edmond together and,
"At your service, Sire," piped Reepicheep from another corner.  They
had all been sold but the men who had bought them were staying to bid
for other slaves and so they had not been taken away yet.  The crowd
parted to let the three of them out and there was great hand-clasping
and greeting between them and Caspian.  Two merchants of Calormen at
once approached.  The Calormenes have dark faces and long beards.  They
wear flowing robes and orange-coloured turbans, and they are a wise,
wealthy, courteous, cruel and ancient people.  They bowed most politely
to Caspian and paid him long compliments, all about the fountains of
prosperity irrigating the gardens of prudence and virtue--and things
like that--but of course what they wanted was the money they had paid.

"That is only fair, sirs," said Caspian.  "Every man who has bought a
slave to-day must have his money back.  Pug, bring out your takings to
the last minim."  (A minim is the fortieth part of a crescent.)

"Does your good Majesty mean to beggar me?" whined Pug.

"You have lived on broken hearts all your life," said Caspian, "and if
you are beggared, it is better to be a beggar than a slave.  But where
is my other friend?"

"Oh him?" said Pug.  "Oh take him and welcome.  Glad to have him off my
hands.  I never see such a drug in the market in all my born days.
Priced him at five crescents in the end and even so nobody'd have him.
Threw him in free with other lots and still no one would have him.
Wouldn't touch him.  Wouldn't look at him.  Tacks, bring out Sulky."

Thus Eustace was produced, and sulky he certainly looked; for though no
one would want to be sold as a slave, it is perhaps even more galling
to be a sort of utility slave whom no one will buy.  He walked up to
Caspian and said, "I see.  As usual.  Been enjoying yourself somewhere
while the rest of us were prisoners.  I suppose you haven't even found
out about the British Consul.  Of course not."

That night they had a great feast in the castle of Narrowhaven and
then, "To-morrow for the beginning of our real adventures!" said
Reepicheep when he had made his bows to everyone and went to bed.  But
it could not really be to-morrow or anything like it.  For now they
were preparing to leave all known lands and seas behind them and the
fullest preparations had to be made.  The _Dawn Treader_ was emptied
and drawn on land by eight horses over rollers and every bit of her was
gone over by the most skilled shipwrights.  Then she was launched again
and victualled and watered as full as she could hold--that is to say
for twenty-eight days.  Even this, as Edmond noticed with
disappointment, only gave them a fortnight's eastward sailing before
they had to abandon their quest.

While all this was being done Caspian missed no chance of questioning
all the oldest sea captains whom he could find in Narrowhaven to learn
if they had any knowledge or even any rumours of land further to the
east.  He poured out many a flagon of the castle ale to weather-beaten
men with short grey beards and clear blue eyes, and many a tall yarn he
heard in return.  But those who seemed the most truthful could tell of
no lands beyond the Lone Islands, and many thought that if you sailed
too far east you would come into the surges of a sea without lands that
swirled perpetually round the rim of the world--"And that, I reckon, is
where your Majesty's friends went to the bottom."  The rest had only
wild stories of islands inhabited by headless men, floating islands,
waterspouts, and a fire that burned along the water.  Only one, to
Reepicheep's delight, said, "And beyond that, Aslan's country.  But
that's beyond the end of the world and you can't get there."  But when
they questioned him he could only say that he'd heard it from his
father.

Bern could only tell them that he had seen his six companions sail away
eastward and that nothing had ever been heard of them again.  He said
this when he and Caspian were standing on the highest point of Avra
looking down on the eastern ocean.  "I've often been up here of a
morning," said the Duke, "and seen the sun come up out of the sea, and
sometimes it looked as if it were only a couple of miles away.  And
I've wondered about my friends and wondered what there really is behind
that horizon.  Nothing, most likely, yet I am always half ashamed that
I stayed behind.  But I wish your Majesty wouldn't go.  We may need
your help here.  This closing the slave market might make a new world;
war with Calormen is what I foresee.  My liege, think again."

"I have an oath, my lord Duke," said Caspian.  "And anyway, what
_could_ I say to Reepicheep?"




_Chapter V_

THE STORM AND WHAT CAME OF IT

It was nearly three weeks after their landing that the _Dawn Treader_
was towed out of Narrowhaven harbour.  Very solemn farewells had been
spoken and a great crowd had assembled to see her departure.  There had
been cheers, and tears too, when Caspian made his last speech to the
Lone Islanders and parted from the Duke and his family, but as the
ship, her purple sail still flapping idly, drew farther from the shore,
and the sound of Caspian's trumpet from the poop came fainter across
the water, everyone became silent.  Then she came into the wind.  The
sail swelled out, the tug cast off and began rowing back, the first
real wave ran up under the _Dawn Treader's_ prow, and she was a live
ship again.  The men off duty went below, Drinian took the first watch
on the poop, and she turned her head eastward round the south of Avra.

The next few days were delightful.  Lucy thought she was the most
fortunate girl in the world, as she woke each morning to see the
reflections of the sunlit water dancing on the ceiling of her cabin and
looked round on all the nice new things she had got in the Lone
Island--sea-boots and buskins and cloaks and jerkins and scarves.  And
then she would go on deck and take a look from the forecastle at a sea
which was a brighter blue each morning and drink in an air that was a
little warmer day by day.  After that came breakfast and such an
appetite as one only has at sea.

She spent a good deal of time sitting on the little bench in the stern
playing chess with Reepicheep.  It was amusing to see him lifting the
pieces, which were far too big for him, with both paws and standing on
tiptoes if he made a move near the centre of the board.  He was a good
player and when he remembered what he was doing he usually won.  But
every now and then Lucy won because the Mouse did something quite
ridiculous like sending a knight into the danger of a queen and castle
combined.  This happened because he had momentarily forgotten it was a
game of chess and was thinking of a real battle and making the knight
do what he would certainly have done in its place.  For his mind was
full of forlorn hopes, death or glory charges, and last stands.

But this pleasant time did not last.  There came an evening when Lucy,
gazing idly astern at the long furrow or wake they were leaving behind
them, saw a great rack of clouds building itself up in the west with
amazing speed.  Then a gap was torn in it and a yellow sunset poured
through the gap.  All the waves behind them seemed to take on unusual
shapes and the sea was a drab or yellowish colour like dirty canvas.
The air grew cold.  The ship seemed to move uneasily as if she felt
danger behind her.  The sail would be flat and limp one minute and
wildly full the next.  While she was noticing these things and
wondering at a sinister change which had come over the very noise of
the wind, Drinian cried, "All hands on deck."  In a moment everyone
became frantically busy.  The hatches were battened down, the galley
fire was put out, men went aloft to reef the sail.  Before they had
finished the storm struck them.  It seemed to Lucy that a great valley
in the sea opened just before their bows, and they rushed down into it,
deeper down than she would have believed possible.  A great grey hill
of water, far higher than the mast, rushed to meet them; it looked
certain death but they were tossed to the top of it.  Then the ship
seemed to spin round.  A cataract of water poured over the deck; the
poop and forecastle were like two islands with a fierce sea between
them.  Up aloft the sailors were lying out along the yard desperately
trying to get control of the sail.  A broken rope stood out sideways in
the wind as straight and stiff as if it was a poker.

"Get below, Ma'am," bawled Drinian.  And Lucy, knowing that
landsmen--and landswomen--are a nuisance to the crew, began to obey.
It was not easy.  The _Dawn Treader_ was listing terribly to starboard
and the deck sloped like the roof of a house.  She had to clamber round
to the top of the ladder, holding on to the rail, and then stand by
while two men climbed up it, and then get down it as best she could.
It was well she was already holding on tight for at the foot of the
ladder another wave roared across the deck, up to her shoulders.  She
was already almost wet through with spray and rain but this was colder.
Then she made a dash for the cabin door and got in and shut out for a
moment the appalling sight of the speed with which they were rushing
into the dark, but not of course the horrible confusion of creakings,
groanings, snappings, clatterings, roarings and boomings which only
sounded more alarming below than they had done on the poop.

And all next day and all the next it went on.  It went on till one
could hardly even remember a time before it had begun.  And there
always had to be three men at the tiller and it was as much as three
could do to keep any kind of a course.  And there always had to be men
at the pump.  And there was hardly any rest for anyone, and nothing
could be cooked and nothing could be dried, and one man was lost
overboard, and they never saw the sun.

When it was over Eustace made the following entry in his diary.

"_September 3_.  The first day for ages when I have been able to write.
We had been driven before a hurricane for thirteen days and nights.  I
know that because I kept a careful count, though the others all say it
was only twelve.  _Pleasant_ to be embarked on a dangerous voyage with
people who can't even count right!  I have had a ghastly time, up and
down enormous waves hour after hour, usually wet to the skin, and not
even an _attempt_ at giving us proper meals.  Needless to say there's
no wireless or even a rocket, so no chance of signalling anyone for
help.  It all proves what I keep on telling them, the madness of
setting out in a rotten little tub like this.  It would be bad enough
even if one was with decent people instead of fiends in human form.
Caspian and Edmund are simply brutal to me.  The night we lost our mast
(there's only a stump left now), though I was _not at all_ well they
forced me to come on deck and work like a slave.  Lucy shoved her oar
in by saying that Reepicheep was longing to go only he was too small.
I wonder she doesn't see that everything that little beast does is all
for the sake of _showing off_.  Even at her age she ought to have that
amount of sense.  To-day the beastly boat is level at last and the
sun's out and we have all been jawing about what to do.  We have food
enough, pretty beastly stuff most of it, to last for sixteen days.
(The poultry were all washed overboard.  Even if they hadn't been, the
storm would have stopped them laying.)  The real trouble is water.  Two
casks seem to have got a leak knocked in them and are empty (Narnian
efficiency again).  On short rations, half a pint a day each, we've got
enough for twelve days.  (There's still lots of rum and wine but even
they realise that would only make them thirstier.)

"If we could, of course, the sensible thing would be to turn west at
once and make for Lone Islands.  But it took us eighteen days to get
where we are, running like mad with a gale behind us.  Even if we got
an east wind it might take us far longer to get back.  And at present
there's no sign of an east wind--in fact there's no wind at all.  As
for rowing back, it would take far too long and Caspian says the men
couldn't row on half a pint of water a day.  I'm pretty sure this is
wrong.  I tried to explain that perspiration really cools people down,
so the men would need less water if they were working.  He didn't take
any notice of this, which is always his way when he can't think of an
answer.  The others all voted for going _on_ in the hope of finding
land.  I felt it my duty to point out that we didn't know there _was_
any land ahead and tried to get them to see the dangers of _wishful
thinking_.  Instead of producing a better plan they had the cheek to
ask me what I proposed.  So I just explained coolly and quietly that I
had been kidnapped and brought away on this _idiotic_ voyage without my
consent, and it was hardly _my_ business to get _them_ out of their
scrape.

"_September 4_.  Still becalmed.  Very short rations for dinner and I
got less than anyone.  Caspian is very clever at helping and thinks I
don't see!  Lucy for some reason tried to make up to me by offering me
some of hers but that _interfering prig_ Edmund wouldn't let her.
Pretty hot sun.  Terribly thirsty all evening.

"_September 5_.  Still becalmed and very hot.  Feeling rotten all day
and am sure I've got a temperature.  Of course they haven't the sense
to keep a thermometer on board.

"_September 6_.  A horrible day.  Woke up in the night _knowing_ I was
feverish and _must_ have a drink of water.  Any doctor would have said
so.  Heaven knows I'm the last person to try to get any unfair
advantage but I never _dreamed_ that this water-rationing would be
meant to apply to a sick man.  In fact I would have woken the others up
and asked for some only I thought it would be selfish to wake them.  So
I just got up and took my cup and tiptoed out of the Black Hole we
sleep in, taking great care not to disturb Caspian and Edmund, for
they've been sleeping badly since the heat and the short water began.
I always try to consider others whether they are nice to me or not.  I
got out all right into the big room, if you can call it a room, where
the rowing benches and the luggage are.  The thing of water is at this
end.  All was going beautifully, but before I'd drawn a cupful who
should catch me but that _little spy_ Reep.  I tried to explain that I
was going on deck for a breath of air (the business about the water had
nothing to do with him) and he asked me why I had a cup.  He made such
a noise that the whole ship was roused.  They treated me scandalously.
I asked, as I think anyone would have, why Reepicheep was sneaking
about the water cask in the middle of the night.  He said that as he
was too small to be any use on deck, he did sentry over the water every
night so that one more man could go to sleep.  Now comes their rotten
unfairness: they all believed _him_.  Can you beat it?

"I had to apologise or the dangerous little brute would have been at me
with his sword.  And then Caspian showed up in his true colours as a
brutal tyrant and said out loud for everyone to hear that anyone found
'stealing' water in future would 'get two dozen'.  I didn't I know what
this meant till Edmund explained to me.  It comes in the sort of books
those Pevensie kids read.

"After this cowardly threat Caspian changed his tune and started being
_patronising_.  Said he was sorry for me and that everyone felt just as
feverish as I did and we must all make the best of it, etc., etc.
Odious stuck-up prig.  Stayed in bed all day to-day.

"_September 7_.  A little wind to-day but still from the west.  Made a
few miles eastward with part of the sail, set on what Drinian calls the
jury-mast--that means the bowsprit set upright and tied (they call it
'lashed') to the stump of the real mast.  Still terribly thirsty.

"_September 8_.  Still sailing east.  I stay in my bunk all day now and
see no one except Lucy till the two _fiends_ come to bed.  Lucy gives
me a little of her water ration.  She says girls don't get as thirsty
as boys.  I had often thought this but it ought to be more generally
known at sea.

"_September 9_.  Land in sight; a very high mountain a long way off to
the south-east.

"_September 10_.  The mountain is bigger and clearer but still a long
way off.  Gulls again to-day for the first time since I don't know how
long.

"_September 11_.  Caught some fish and had them for dinner.  Dropped
anchor at about 7 p.m. in three fathoms of water in a bay of this
mountainous island.  That idiot Caspian wouldn't let us go ashore
because it was getting dark and he was afraid of savages and wild
beasts.  Extra water ration to-night."


What awaited them on this island was going to concern Eustace more than
anyone else, but it cannot be told in his words because after September
11 he forgot about keeping his diary for a long time.

When morning came, with a low, grey sky but very hot, the adventurers
found they were in a bay encircled by such cliffs and crags that it was
like a Norwegian fjord.  In front of them, at the head of the bay there
was some level land heavily overgrown with trees that appeared to be
cedars, through which a rapid stream came out.  Beyond that was a steep
ascent ending in a jagged ridge and behind that a vague darkness of
mountains which ran up into dull coloured clouds so that you could not
see their tops.  The nearer cliffs, at each side of the bay, were
streaked here and there with lines of white which everyone knew to be
waterfalls, though at that distance they did not show any movement or
make any noise.  Indeed the whole place was very silent and the water
of the bay as smooth as glass.  It reflected every detail of the
cliffs.  The scene would have been pretty in a picture but was rather
oppressive in real life.  It was not a country that welcomed visitors.

The whole ship's company went ashore in two boatloads and everyone
drank and washed deliciously in the river and had a meal and a rest
before Caspian sent four men back to keep the ship, and the day's work
began.  There was everything to be done.  The casks must be brought
ashore and the faulty ones mended if possible and all refilled; a
tree--a pine if they could get it--must be felled and made into a new
mast; sails must be repaired; a hunting party organised to shoot any
game the land might yield; clothes to be washed and mended; and
countless small breakages on board to be set right.  For the _Dawn
Treader_ herself--and this was more obvious now that they saw her at a
distance--could hardly be recognised as the same gallant ship which had
left Narrowhaven.  She looked a crippled, discoloured hulk which anyone
might have taken for a wreck.  And her officers and crew were no
better--lean, pale, red-eyed from lack of sleep, and dressed in rags.

As Eustace lay under a tree and heard all these plans being discussed
his heart sank.  Was there going to be no rest?  It looked as if their
first day on the longed-for land was going to be quite as hard work as
a day at sea.  Then a delightful idea occurred to him.  Nobody was
looking--they were all chattering about their ship as if they actually
liked the beastly thing.  Why shouldn't he simply slip away?  He would
take a stroll inland, find a cool, airy place up in the mountains, have
a good long sleep, and not rejoin the others till the day's work was
over.  He felt it would do him good.  But he would take great care to
keep the bay and the ship in sight so as to be sure of his way back.
He wouldn't like to be left behind in this country.

He at once put his plan into action.  He rose quietly from his place
and walked away among the trees, taking care to go slowly and in an
aimless manner so that anyone who saw him would think he was merely
stretching his legs.  He was surprised to find how quickly the noise of
conversation died away behind him and how very silent and warm and dark
green the wood became.  Soon he felt he could venture on a quicker and
more determined stride.

This soon brought him out of the wood.  The ground began sloping
steeply up in front of him.  The grass was dry and slippery but
manageable if he used his hands as well as his feet, and though he
panted and mopped his forehead a good deal, he plugged away steadily.
This showed, by the way, that his new life, little as he suspected it,
had already done him some good; the old Eustace, Harold's and Alberta's
Eustace, would have given up the climb after about ten minutes.

Slowly, and with several rests, he reached the ridge.  Here he had
expected to have a view into the heart of the island, but the clouds
had now come lower and nearer and a sea of fog was rolling to meet him.
He sat down and looked back.  He was now so high that the bay looked
small beneath him and miles of sea were visible.  Then the fog from the
mountains closed in all round him, thick but not cold, and he lay down
and turned this way and that to find the most comfortable position to
enjoy himself.

But he didn't enjoy himself, or not for very long.  He began, almost
for the first time in his life, to feel lonely.  At first this feeling
grew very gradually.  And then he began to worry about the time.  There
was not the slightest sound.  Suddenly it occurred to him that he might
have been lying there for hours.  Perhaps the others had gone!  Perhaps
they had let him wander away on purpose simply in order to leave him
behind!  He leaped up in a panic and began the descent.

At first he tried to do it too quickly, slipped on the steep grass, and
slid for several feet.  Then he thought this had carried him too far to
the left--and as he came up he had seen precipices on that side.  So he
clambered up again, as near as he could guess to the place he had
started from, and began the descent afresh, bearing to his right.
After that things seemed to be going better.  He went very cautiously,
for he could not see more than a yard ahead, and there was still
perfect silence all around him.  It is very unpleasant to have to go
cautiously when there is a voice inside you saying all the time,
"Hurry, hurry, hurry."  For every moment the terrible idea of being
left behind grew stronger.  If he had understood Caspian and the
Pevensies at all he would have known, of course, that there was not the
least chance of their doing any such thing.  But he had persuaded
himself that they were all fiends in human form.

"At last!" said Eustace as he came slithering down a slide of loose
stones (_scree_, they call it) and found himself on the level.  "And
now, where are those trees?  There _is_ something dark ahead.  Why, I
do believe the fog is clearing."

It was.  The light increased every moment and made him blink.  The fog
lifted.  He was in an utterly unknown valley and the sea was nowhere in
sight.




_Chapter VI_

THE ADVENTURES OF EUSTACE

At that very moment the others were washing hands and faces in the
river and generally getting ready for dinner and a rest.  The three
best archers had gone up into the hills north of the bay and returned
laden with a pair of wild goats which were now roasting over a fire.
Caspian had ordered a cask of wine ashore, strong wine of Archenland
which had to be mixed with water before you drank it, so there would be
plenty for all.  The work had gone well so far and it was a merry meal.
Only after the second helping of goat did Edmund say, "Where's that
blighter Eustace?"

Meanwhile Eustace stared round the unknown valley.  It was so narrow
and deep, and the precipices which surrounded it so sheer, that it was
like a huge pit or trench.  The floor was grassy though strewn with
rocks, and here and there Eustace saw black burnt patches like those
you see on the sides of a railway embankment in a dry summer.  About
fifteen yards away from him was a pool of clear, smooth water.  There
was, at first, nothing else at all in the valley; not an animal, not a
bird, not an insect.  The sun beat down and grim peaks and horns of
mountains peered over the valley's edge.

Eustace realised of course that in the fog he had come down the wrong
side of the ridge, so he turned at once to see about getting back.  But
as soon as he had looked he shuddered.  Apparently he had by amazing
luck found the only possible way down--a long green spit of land,
horribly steep and narrow, with precipices on either side.  There was
no other possible way of getting back.  But could he do it, now that he
saw what it was really like?  His head swam at the very thought of it.

He turned round again, thinking that at any rate he'd better have a
good drink from the pool first.  But as soon as he had turned and
before he had taken a step forward into the valley he heard a noise
behind him.  It was only a small noise but it sounded loud in that
immense silence.  It froze him dead still where he stood for a second.
Then he slewed round his head and looked.

At the bottom of the cliff a little on his left hand was a low, dark
hole--the entrance to a cave perhaps.  And out of this two thin wisps
of smoke were coming.  And the loose stones just beneath the dark
hollow were moving (that was the noise he had heard) just as if
something were crawling in the dark behind them.

Something _was_ crawling.  Worse still, something was coming out.
Edmund or Lucy or you would have recognised it at once, but Eustace had
read none of the right books.  The thing that came out of the cave was
something he had never even imagined--a long lead-coloured snout, dull
red eyes, no feathers or fur, a long lithe body that trailed on the
ground, legs whose elbows went up higher than its back like a spider's,
cruel claws, bat's wings that made a rasping noise on the stones, yards
of tail.  And the two lines of smoke were coming from its two nostrils.
He never said the word _Dragon_ to himself.  Nor would it have made
things any better if he had.

But perhaps if he had known something about dragons he would have been
a little surprised at this dragon's behaviour.  It did not sit up and
clap its wings, nor did it shoot out a stream of flame from its mouth.
The smoke from its nostrils was like the smoke of a fire that will not
last much longer.  Nor did it seem to have noticed Eustace.  It moved
very slowly towards the pool--slowly and with many pauses.  Even in his
fear Eustace felt that it was an old, sad creature.  He wondered if he
dared make a dash for the ascent.  But it might look round if he made
any noise.  It might come more to life.  Perhaps it was only shamming.
Anyway, what was the use of trying to escape by climbing from a
creature that could fly?

It reached the pool and slid its horrible scaly chin down over the
gravel to drink: but before it had drunk there came from it a great
croaking or clanging cry and after a few twitches and convulsions it
rolled round on its side and lay perfectly still with one claw in the
air.  A little dark blood gushed from its wide-opened mouth.  The smoke
from its nostrils turned black for a moment and then floated away.  No
more came.

For a long time Eustace did not dare to move.  Perhaps this was the
brute's trick, the way it lured travellers to their doom.  But one
couldn't wait for ever.  He took a step nearer, then two steps, and
halted again.  The dragon remained motionless; he noticed too that the
red fire had gone out of its eyes.  At last he came up to it.  He was
quite sure now that it was dead.  With a shudder he touched it; nothing
happened.

The relief was so great that Eustace almost laughed out loud.  He began
to feel as if he had fought and killed the dragon instead of merely
seeing it die.  He stepped over it and went to the pool for his drink,
for the heat was getting unbearable.  He was not surprised when he
heard a peal of thunder.  Almost immediately afterwards the sun
disappeared and before he had finished his drink big drops of rain were
falling.

The climate of this island was a very unpleasant one.  In less than a
minute Eustace was wet to the skin and half blinded with such rain as
one never sees in Europe.  There was no use trying to climb out of the
valley as long as this lasted.  He bolted for the only shelter in
sight--the dragon's cave.  There he lay down and tried to get his
breath.

Most of us know what we should expect to find in a dragon's lair, but,
as I said before, Eustace had read only the wrong books.  They had a
lot to say about exports and imports and governments and drains, but
they were weak on dragons.  That is why he was so puzzled at the
surface on which he was lying.  Parts of it were too prickly to be
stones and too hard to be thorns, and there seemed to be a great many
round, flat things, and it all clinked when he moved.  There was light
enough at the cave's mouth to examine it by.  And of course Eustace
found it to be what any of us could have told him in advance--treasure.
There were crowns (those were the prickly things), coins, rings,
bracelets, ingots, cups, plates and gems.

Eustace (unlike most boys) had never thought much of treasure but he
saw at once the use it would be in this new world which he had so
foolishly stumbled into through the picture in Lucy's bedroom at home.
"They don't have any tax here," he said.  "And you don't have to give
treasure to the government.  With some of this stuff I could have quite
a decent time here--perhaps in Calormen.  It sounds the least phoney of
these countries.  I wonder how much I can carry?  That bracelet
now--those things in it are probably diamonds--I'll slip that on my own
wrist.  Too big, but not if I push it right up here above my elbow.
Then fill my pockets with diamonds--that's easier than gold.  I wonder
when this infernal rain's going to let up?"  He got into a less
uncomfortable part of the pile, where it was mostly coins, and settled
down to wait.  But a bad fright, when once it is over, and especially a
bad fright following a mountain walk, leaves you very tired.  Eustace
fell asleep.

By the time he was sound asleep and snoring the others had finished
dinner and become seriously alarmed about him.  They shouted, "Eustace!
Eustace!  Coo-ee!" till they were hoarse and Caspian blew his horn.

"He's nowhere near or he'd have heard that," said Lucy with a white
face.

"Confound the fellow," said Edmund.  "What on earth did he want to
slink away like this for?"

"But we must do something," said Lucy.  "He may have got lost, or
fallen into a hole, or been captured by savages."

"Or killed by wild beasts," said Drinian.

"And a good riddance if he has, _I_ say," muttered Rhince.

"Master Rhince," said Reepicheep, "you never spoke a word that became
you less.  The creature is no friend of mine but he is of the Queen's
blood, and while he is one of our fellowship it concerns our honour to
find him and to avenge him if he is dead."

"Of course we've got to find him (if we _can_)" said Caspian wearily.
"That's the nuisance of it.  It means a search party and endless
trouble.  Bother Eustace."

Meanwhile Eustace slept and slept--and slept.  What woke him was a pain
in his arm.  The moon was shining in at the mouth of the cave, and the
bed of treasures seemed to have grown much more comfortable: in fact he
could hardly feel it at all.  He was puzzled by the pain in his arm at
first, but presently it occurred to him that the bracelet which he had
shoved up above his elbow had become strangely tight.  His arm must
have swollen while he was asleep (it was his left arm).

He moved his right arm in order to feel his left, but stopped before he
had moved it an inch and bit his lip in terror.  For just in front of
him, and a little on his right, where the moonlight fell clear on the
floor of the cave, he saw a hideous shape moving.  He knew that shape:
it was a dragon's claw.  It had moved as he moved his hand and became
still when he stopped moving his hand.

"Oh, what a fool I've been," thought Eustace.  "Of course, the brute
had a mate and it's lying beside me."

For several minutes he did not dare to move a muscle.  He saw two thin
columns of smoke going up before his eyes, black against the moonlight;
just as there had been smoke coming from the other dragon's nose before
it died.  This was so alarming that he held his breath.  The two
columns of smoke vanished.  When he could hold his breath no longer he
let it out stealthily; instantly two jets of smoke appeared again.  But
even yet he had no idea of the truth.

Presently he decided that he would edge very cautiously to his left and
try to creep out of the cave.  Perhaps the creature was asleep--and
anyway it was his only chance.  But of course before he edged to the
left he looked to the left.  Oh horror! there was a dragon's claw on
that side too.

No one will blame Eustace if at this moment he shed tears.  He was
surprised at the size of his own tears as he saw them splashing on to
the treasure in front of him.  They also seemed strangely hot; steam
went up from them.

But there was no good crying.  He must try to crawl out from between
the two dragons.  He began extending his right arm.  The dragon's
fore-leg and claw on his right went through exactly the same motion.
Then he thought he would try his left.  The dragon limb on that side
moved too.

Two dragons, one on each side, mimicking whatever he did!  His nerve
broke and he simply made a bolt for it.

There was such a clatter and rasping, and clinking of gold, and
grinding of stones, as he rushed out of the cave that he thought they
were both following him.  He daren't look back.  He rushed to the pool.
The twisted shape of the dead dragon lying in the moonlight would have
been enough to frighten anyone but now he hardly noticed it.  His idea
was to get into the water.

But just as he reached the edge of the pool two things happened.  First
of all it came over him like a thunder-clap that he had been running on
all fours--and why on earth had he been doing that?  And secondly, as
he bent towards the water, he thought for a second that yet another
dragon was staring up at him out of the pool.  But in an instant he
realised the truth.  That dragon face in the pool was his own
reflection.  There was no doubt of it.  It moved as he moved: it opened
and shut its mouth as he opened and shut his.

He had turned into a dragon while he was asleep.  Sleeping on a
dragon's hoard with greedy, dragonish thoughts in his heart, he had
become a dragon himself.

That explained everything.  There had been no two dragons beside him in
the cave.  The claws to right and left had been his own right and left
claws.  The two columns of smoke had been coming from his own nostrils.
As for the pain in his left arm (or what had been his left arm) he
could now see what had happened by squinting with his left eye.  The
bracelet which had fitted very nicely on the upper arm of a boy was far
too small for the thick, stumpy foreleg of a dragon.  It had sunk
deeply into his scaly flesh and there was a throbbing bulge on each
side of it.  He tore at the place with his dragon's teeth but could not
get it off.

In spite of the pain, his first feeling was one of relief.  There was
nothing to be afraid of any more.  He was a terror himself now and
nothing in the world but a knight (and not all of those) would dare to
attack him.  He could get even with Caspian and Edmund now----

But the moment he thought this he realised that he didn't want to.  He
wanted to be friends.  He wanted to get back among humans and talk and
laugh and share things.  He realised that he was a monster cut off from
the whole human race.  An appalling loneliness came over him.  He began
to see that the others had not really been fiends at all.  He began to
wonder if he himself had been such a nice person as he had always
supposed.  He longed for their voices.  He would have been grateful for
a kind word even from Reepicheep.

When he thought of this the poor dragon that had been Eustace lifted up
its voice and wept.  A powerful dragon crying its eyes out under the
moon in a deserted valley is a sight and a sound hardly to be imagined.

At last he decided he would try to find his way back to the shore.  He
realised now that Caspian would never have sailed away and left him.
And he felt sure that somehow or other he would be able to make people
understand who he was.

He took a long drink and then (I know this sounds shocking, but it
isn't if you think it over) he ate nearly all the dead dragon.  He was
half-way through it before he realised what he was doing; for, you see,
though his mind was the mind of Eustace, his tastes and his digestion
were dragonish.  And there is nothing a dragon likes so well as fresh
dragon.  That is why you so seldom find more than one dragon in the
same county.

Then he turned to climb out of the valley.  He began the climb with a
jump and as soon as he jumped he found that he was flying.  He had
quite forgotten about his wings and it was a great surprise to him--the
first pleasant surprise he had had for a long time.  He rose high into
the air and saw innumerable mountain-tops spread out beneath him in the
moonlight.  He could see the bay like a silver slab and the _Dawn
Treader_ lying at anchor and camp fires twinkling in the woods beside
the beach.  From a great height he launched himself down towards them
in a single glide.

Lucy was sleeping very sound for she had sat up till the return of the
search party in hope of good news about Eustace.  It had been led by
Caspian and had come back late and weary.  Their news was disquieting.
They had found no trace of Eustace but had seen a dead dragon in a
valley.  They tried to make the best of it and everyone assured
everyone else that there were not likely to be more dragons about, and
that one which was dead at about three o'clock that afternoon (which
was when they had seen it) would hardly have been killing people a very
few hours before.

"Unless it ate the little brat and died of him: he'd poison anything,"
said Rhince.  But he said this under his breath and no one heard it.

But later in the night Lucy was waked, very softly, and found the whole
company gathered close together and talking in whispers.

"What is it?" said Lucy.

"We must all show great constancy," Caspian was saying.  "A dragon has
just flown over the tree-tops and lighted on the beach.  Yes, I am
afraid it is between us and the ship.  And arrows are no use against
dragons.  And they're not at all afraid of fire."

"With your Majesty's leave----" began Reepicheep.

"No, Reepicheep," said the King very firmly, "you are not going to
attempt a single combat with it.  And unless you promise to obey me in
this matter I'll have you tied up.  We must just keep close watch and,
as soon as it is light, go down to the beach and give it battle.  I
will lead.  King Edmund will be on my right and the Lord Drinian on my
left.  There are no other arrangements to be made.  It will be light in
a couple of hours.  In an hour's time let a meal be served out and what
is left of the wine.  And let everything be done silently."

"Perhaps it will go away," said Lucy.

"It'll be worse if it does," said Edmund, "because then we shan't know
where it is.  If there's a wasp in the room I like to be able to see
it."

The rest of the night was dreadful, and when the meal came, though they
knew they ought to eat, many found that they had very poor appetites.
And endless hours seemed to pass before the darkness thinned and birds
began chirping here and there and the world got colder and wetter than
it had been all night and Caspian said, "Now for it, friends."

They got up, all with swords drawn, and formed themselves into a solid
mass with Lucy in the middle and Reepicheep on her shoulder.  It was
nicer than the waiting about and everyone felt fonder of everyone else
than at ordinary times.  A moment later they were marching.  It grew
lighter as they came to the edge of the wood.  And there on the sand,
like a giant lizard, or a flexible crocodile, or a serpent with legs,
huge and horrible and humpy, lay the dragon.

But when it saw them, instead of rising up and blowing fire and smoke,
the dragon retreated--you could almost say it waddled--back into the
shallows of the bay.

"What's it wagging its head like that for?" said Edmund.

"And now it's nodding," said Caspian,

"And there's something coming from its eyes," said Drinian.

"Oh, can't you see," said Lucy.  "It's crying.  Those are tears."

"I shouldn't trust to that, Ma'am," said Drinian.  "That's what
crocodiles do, to put you off your guard."

"It wagged its head when you said that," remarked Edmund.  "Just as if
it meant No.  Look, there it goes again."

"Do you think it understands what we're saying?" asked Lucy.

The dragon nodded its head violently.

Reepicheep slipped off Lucy's shoulder and stepped to the front.

"Dragon," came his shrill voice, "can you understand speech?"

The dragon nodded.

"Can you speak?"

It shook its head.

"Then," said Reepicheep, "it is idle to ask you your business.  But if
you will swear friendship with us raise your left foreleg above your
head."

It did so, but clumsily because that leg was sore and swollen with the
golden bracelet.

"Oh look," said Lucy, "there's something wrong with its leg.  The poor
thing--that's probably what it was crying about.  Perhaps it came to us
to be cured like in Androcles and the lion."

"Be careful, Lucy," said Caspian.  "It's a very clever dragon but it
may be a liar."

Lucy had, however, already run forward, followed by Reepicheep, as fast
as his short legs could carry him, and then of course the boys and
Drinian came, too.

"Show me your poor paw," said Lucy, "I might be able to cure it."

The dragon-that-had-been-Eustace held out its sore leg gladly enough,
remembering how Lucy's cordial had cured him of sea-sickness before he
became a dragon.  But he was disappointed.  The magic fluid reduced the
swelling and eased the pain a little but it could not dissolve the gold.

Everyone had now crowded round to watch the treatment, and Caspian
suddenly exclaimed, "Look!"  He was staring at the bracelet.




_Chapter VII_

HOW THE ADVENTURE ENDED

"Look at what?" said Edmund.

"Look at the device on the gold," said Caspian.

"A little hammer with a diamond above it like a star," said Drinian.
"Why, I've seen that before."

"Seen it!" said Caspian.  "Why, of course you have.  It is the sign of
a great Narnian house.  This is the Lord Octesian's arm-ring."

"Villain," said Reepicheep to the dragon, "have you devoured a Narnian
lord?"  But the dragon shook his head violently.

"Or perhaps," said Lucy, "this is the Lord Octesian, turned into a
dragon--under an enchantment, you know."

"It needn't be either," said Edmund.  "All dragons collect gold.  But I
think it's a safe guess that Octesian got no further than this island."

"Are you the Lord Octesian?" said Lucy to the dragon, and then, when it
sadly shook its head, "Are you someone enchanted--someone human, I
mean?"

It nodded violently.

And then someone said--people disputed afterwards whether Lucy or
Edmund said it first--"You're not--not Eustace by any chance?"

And Eustace nodded his terrible dragon head and thumped his tail in the
sea and everyone skipped back (some of the sailors with ejaculations I
will not put down in writing) to avoid the enormous and boiling tears
which flowed from his eyes.

Lucy tried hard to console him and even screwed up her courage to kiss
the scaly face, and nearly everyone said "Hard luck" and several
assured Eustace that they would all stand by him and many said there
was sure to be some way of disenchanting him and they'd have him as
right as rain in a day or two.  And of course they were all very
anxious to hear his story, but he couldn't speak.  More than once in
the days that followed he attempted to write it for them on the sand.
But this never succeeded.  In the first place Eustace (never having
read the right books) had no idea how to tell a story straight.  And
for another thing, the muscles and nerves of the dragon-claws that he
had to use had never learned to write and were not built for writing
anyway.  As a result he never got nearly to the end before the tide
came in and washed away all the writing except the bits he had already
trodden on or accidentally swished out with his tail.  And all that
anyone had seen would be something like this--the dots are for the bits
he had smudged out--

I WNET TO SLEE ... RGOS AGRONS I MEAN DRANGONS CAVE CAUSE ITWAS DEAD
AND AINIG SO HAR ... WOKE UP AND COU ... GET OFFF MI ARM OH BOTHER ...


It was, however, clear to everyone that Eustace's character had been
rather improved by becoming a dragon.  He was anxious to help.  He flew
over the whole island and found that it was all mountainous and
inhabited only by wild goats and droves of wild swine.  Of these he
brought back many carcases as provisions for the ship.  He was a very
humane killer too, for he could dispatch a beast with one blow of his
tail so that it didn't know (and presumably still doesn't know) it had
been killed.  He ate a few himself, of course, but always alone, for
now that he was a dragon he liked his food raw but he could never bear
to let the others see him at his messy meals.  And one day, flying
slowly and wearily but in great triumph, he bore back to camp a great
tall pine tree which he had torn up by the roots in a distant valley
and which could be made into a capital mast.  And in the evening if it
turned chilly, as it sometimes did after the heavy rains, he was a
comfort to everyone, for the whole party would come and sit with their
backs against his hot sides and get well warmed and dried; and one puff
of his fiery breath would light the most obstinate fire.  Sometimes he
would take a select party for a fly on his back, so that they could see
wheeling below them the green slopes, the rocky heights, the narrow
pit-like valleys, and far out over the sea to the eastward a spot of
darker blue on the blue horizon which might be land.

The pleasure (quite new to him) of being liked and, still more, of
liking other people, was what kept Eustace from despair.  For it was
very dreary being a dragon.  He shuddered whenever he caught sight of
his own reflection as he flew over a mountain lake.  He hated the huge
batlike wings, the saw-edged ridge on his back, and the cruel curved
claws.  He was almost afraid to be alone with himself and yet he was
ashamed to be with the others.  On the evenings when he was not being
used as a hot-water bottle he would slink away from the camp and lie
curled up like a snake between the wood and the water.  On such
occasions, greatly to his surprise, Reepicheep was his most constant
comforter.  The noble Mouse would creep away from the merry circle at
the camp-fire and sit down by the dragon's head, well to the windward
to be out of the way of his smoky breath.  There he would explain that
what had happened to Eustace was a striking illustration of the turn of
Fortune's wheel, and that if he had Eustace at his own house in Narnia
(it was really a hole not a house and the dragon's head, let alone his
body, would not have fitted in) he could show him more than a hundred
examples of emperors, kings, dukes, knights, poets, lovers,
astronomers, philosophers, and magicians, who had fallen from
prosperity into the most distressing circumstances, and of whom many
had recovered and lived happily ever afterwards.  It did not, perhaps,
seem so very comforting at the time, but it was kindly meant and
Eustace never forgot it.

But of course what hung over everyone like a cloud was the problem of
what to do with their dragon when they were ready to sail.  They tried
not to talk of it when he was there, but he couldn't help overhearing
things like, "Would he fit all along one side of the deck?  And we'd
have to shift all the stores to the other side down below so as to
balance," or, "Would towing him be any good?" or "Would he be able to
keep up by flying?" and (most often of all), "But how are we to feed
him?"  And poor Eustace realised more and more that since the first day
he came on board he had been an unmitigated nuisance and that he was
now a greater nuisance still.  And this ate into his mind, just as that
bracelet ate into his foreleg.  He knew that it only made it worse to
tear at it with his great teeth, but he couldn't help tearing now and
then, especially on hot nights.


About six days after they had landed on Dragon Island Edmund happened
to wake up very early one morning.  It was just getting grey so that
you could see the tree-trunks if they were between you and the bay but
not in the other direction.  As he woke he thought he heard something
moving, so he raised himself on one elbow and looked about him: and
presently he thought he saw a dark figure moving on the seaward side of
the wood.  The idea that at once occurred to his mind was, "Are we so
sure there are no natives on this island after all?"  Then he thought
it was Caspian--it was about the right size--but he knew that Caspian
had been sleeping next to him and could see that he hadn't moved.
Edmund made sure that his sword was in its place and then rose to
investigate.

He came down softly to the edge of the wood and the dark figure was
still there.  He saw now that it was too small for Caspian and too big
for Lucy.  It did not run away.  Edmund drew his sword and was about to
challenge the stranger when the stranger said in a low voice,

"Is that you, Edmund?"

"Yes.  Who are you?" said he.

"Don't you know me?" said the other.  "It's me--Eustace."

"By jove," said Edmund, "so it is.  My dear chap----"

"Hush," said Eustace and lurched as if he were going to fall.

"Hello!" said Edmund, steadying him.  "What's up.  Are you ill?"

Eustace was silent for so long that Edmund thought he was fainting; but
at last he said, "It's been ghastly.  You don't know ... but it's all
right now.  Could we go and talk somewhere?  I don't want to meet the
others just yet."

"Yes, rather, anywhere you like," said Edmund.  "We can go and sit on
the rocks over there.  I say, I am glad to see you--er--looking
yourself again.  You must have had a pretty beastly time."

They went to the rocks and sat down looking out across the bay while
the sky got paler and paler and the stars disappeared except for one
very bright one low down and near the horizon.

"I won't tell you how I became a--a dragon till I can tell the others
and get it all over," said Eustace.  "By the way, I didn't even know it
_was_ a dragon till I heard you all using the word when I turned up
here the other morning.  I want to tell you how I stopped being one."

"Fire ahead," said Edmund.

"Well, last night I was more miserable than ever.  And that beastly
arm-ring was hurting like anything----"

"Is that all right now?"

Eustace laughed--a different laugh from any Edmund had heard him give
before--and slipped the bracelet easily off his arm.  "There it is," he
said, "and anyone who likes can have it as far as I'm concerned.  Well,
as I say, I was lying awake and wondering what on earth would become of
me.  And then--but, mind you, it may have been all a dream.  I don't
know."

"Go on," said Edmund, with considerable patience.

"Well, anyway, I looked up and saw the very last thing I expected: a
huge lion coming slowly towards me.  And one queer thing was that there
was no moon last night, but there was moonlight where the lion was.  So
it came nearer and nearer.  I was terribly afraid of it.  You may think
that, being a dragon, I could have knocked any lion out easily enough.
But it wasn't that kind of fear.  I wasn't afraid of it eating me, I
was just afraid of _it_--if you can understand.  Well, it came close up
to me and looked straight into my eyes.  And I shut my eyes tight.  But
that wasn't any good because it told me to follow it."

"You mean it spoke?"

"I don't know.  Now that you mention it, I don't think it did.  But it
told me all the same.  And I knew I'd have to do what it told me, so I
got up and followed it.  And it led me a long way into the mountains.
And there was always this moonlight over and round the lion wherever we
went.  So at last we came to the top of a mountain I'd never seen
before and on the top of this mountain there was a garden--trees and
fruit and everything.  In the middle of it there was a well.

"I knew it was a well because you could see the water bubbling up from
the bottom of it: but it was a lot bigger than most wells--like a very
big, round bath with marble steps going down into it.  The water was as
clear as anything and I thought if I could get in there and bathe it
would ease the pain in my leg.  But the lion told me I must undress
first.  Mind you, I don't know if he said any words out loud or not.

"I was just going to say that I couldn't undress because I hadn't any
clothes on when I suddenly thought that dragons are snaky sort of
things and snakes can cast their skins.  Oh, of course, thought I,
that's what the lion means.  So I started scratching myself and my
scales began coming off all over the place.  And then I scratched a
little deeper and, instead of just scales coming off here and there, my
whole skin started peeling off beautifully, like it does after an
illness, or as if I was a banana.  In a minute or two I just stepped
out of it.  I could see it lying there beside me, looking rather nasty.
It was a most lovely feeling.  So I started to go down into the well
for my bathe.

"But just as I was going to put my feet into the water I looked down
and saw that they were all hard and rough and wrinkled and scaly just
as they had been before.  Oh, that's all right, said I, it only means I
had another smaller suit on underneath the first one, and I'll have to
get out of it too.  So I scratched and tore again and this under skin
peeled off beautifully and out I stepped and left it lying beside the
other one and went down to the well for my bathe.

"Well, exactly the same thing happened again.  And I thought to myself,
oh dear, how ever many skins have I got to take off?  For I was longing
to bathe my leg.  So I scratched away for the third time and got off a
third skin, just like the two others, and stepped out of it.  But as
soon as I looked at myself in the water I knew it had been no good.

"Then the lion said--but I don't know if it spoke--You will have to let
me undress you.  I was afraid of his claws, I can tell you, but I was
pretty nearly desperate now.  So I just lay flat down on my back to let
him do it.

"The very first tear he made was so deep that I thought it had gone
right into my heart.  And when he began pulling the skin off, it hurt
worse than anything I've ever felt.  The only thing that made me able
to bear it was just the pleasure of feeling the stuff peel off.  You
know--if you've ever picked the scab of a sore place.  It hurts like
billy-oh but it _is_ such fun to see it coming away."

"I know exactly what you mean," said Edmund.

"Well, he peeled the beastly stuff right off--just as I thought I'd
done it myself the other three times, only they hadn't hurt--and there
it was lying on the grass: only ever so much thicker, and darker, and
more knobbly looking than the others had been.  And there was I as
smooth and soft as a peeled switch and smaller than I had been.  Then
he caught hold of me--I didn't like that much for I was very tender
underneath now that I'd no skin on--and threw me into the water.  It
smarted like anything but only for a moment.  After that it became
perfectly delicious and as soon as I started swimming and splashing I
found that all the pain had gone from my arm.  And then I saw why.  I'd
turned into a boy again.  You'd think me simply phoney if I told you
how I felt about my own arms.  I know they've no muscle and are pretty
mouldy compared with Caspian's, but I was so glad to see them.

"After a bit the lion took me out and dressed me----"

"Dressed you.  With his paws?"

"Well, I don't exactly remember that bit.  But he did somehow or other:
in new clothes--the same I've got on now, as a matter of fact.  And
then suddenly I was back here.  Which is what makes me think it must
have been a dream."

"No.  It wasn't a dream," said Edmund.

"Why not?"

"Well, there are the clothes, for one thing.  And you have been--well,
un-dragoned, for another."

"What do you think it was, then?" asked Eustace.

"I think you've seen Aslan," said Edmund.

"Aslan!" said Eustace.  "I've heard that name mentioned several times
since we joined the _Dawn Treader_.  And I felt--I don't know what--I
hated it.  But I was hating everything then.  And by the way, I'd like
to apologise.  I'm afraid I've been pretty beastly."

"That's all right," said Edmund.  "Between ourselves, you haven't been
as bad as I was on my first trip to Narnia.  You were only an ass, but
I was a traitor."

"Well, don't tell me about it, then," said Eustace.  "But who is Aslan?
Do you know him?"

"Well--he knows me," said Edmund.  "He is the great Lion, the son of
the Emperor over Sea, who saved me and saved Narnia.  We've all seen
him.  Lucy sees him most often.  And it may be Aslan's country we are
sailing to."

Neither said anything for a while.  The last bright star had vanished
and though they could not see the sunrise because of the mountains on
their right they knew it was going on because the sky above them and
the bay before them turned the colour of roses.  Then some bird of the
parrot kind screamed in the wood behind them, they heard movements
among the trees, and finally a blast on Caspian's horn.  The camp was
astir.

Great was the rejoicing when Edmund and the restored Eustace walked
into the breakfast circle round the camp-fire.  And now of course
everyone heard the earlier part of his story.  People wondered whether
the other dragon had killed the Lord Octesian several years ago or
whether Octesian himself had been the old dragon.  The jewels with
which Eustace had crammed his pockets in the cave had disappeared along
with the clothes he had then been wearing: but no one, least of all
Eustace himself, felt any desire to go back to that valley for more
treasure.

In a few days now the _Dawn Treader_, re-masted, re-painted, and well
stored, was ready to sail.  Before they embarked Caspian caused to be
cut on a smooth cliff facing the bay the words:

  DRAGON ISLAND
  DISCOVERED BY CASPIAN X, KING OF NARNIA, ETC.
  IN THE FOURTH
  YEAR OF HIS REIGN.
  HERE, AS WE SUPPOSE, THE LORD OCTESIAN
  HAD HIS DEATH


It would be nice, and fairly nearly true, to say that "from that time
forth Eustace was a different boy".  To be strictly accurate, he began
to be a different boy.  He had relapses.  There were still many days
when he could be very tiresome.  But most of those I shall not notice.
The cure had begun.

The Lord Octesian's arm ring had a curious fate.  Eustace did not want
it and offered it to Caspian and Caspian offered it to Lucy.  She did
not care about having it.  "Very well, then, catch as catch can," said
Caspian and flung it up in the air.  This was when they were all
standing looking at the inscription.  Up went the ring, flashing in the
sunlight, and caught, and hung, as neatly as a well-thrown quoit, on a
little projection in the rock.  No one could climb up to get it from
below and no one could climb down to get it from above.  And there, for
all I know, it is hanging still and may hang till that world ends.




_Chapter VIII_

TWO NARROW ESCAPES

Everyone was cheerful as the _Dawn Treader_ sailed from Dragon Island.
They had fair wind as soon as they were out of the bay and came early
next morning to the unknown land which some of them had seen when
flying over the mountains while Eustace was still a dragon.  It was a
low green island inhabited by nothing but rabbits and a few goats, but
from the ruins of stone huts, and from blackened places where fires had
been, they judged that it had been peopled not long before.  There were
also some bones and broken weapons.

"Pirates' work," said Caspian.

"Or the dragon's," said Edmund.

The only other thing they found here was a little skin boat or coracle
on the sands.  It was made of hide stretched over a wicker framework.
It was a tiny boat, barely four feet long, and the paddle which still
lay in it was in proportion.  They thought that either it had been made
for a child or else that the people of that country had been Dwarfs.
Reepicheep decided to keep it, as it was just the right size for him;
so it was taken on board.  They called that land Burnt Island and
sailed away before noon.

For some five days they ran before a south-south-east wind, out of
sight of all lands and seeing neither fish nor gull.  Then they had a
day that rained hard till the afternoon.  Eustace lost two games of
chess to Reepicheep and began to get rather like his old and
disagreeable self again, and Edmund said he wished they could have gone
to America with Susan.  Then Lucy looked out of the stern windows and
said:

"Hello!  I do believe it's stopping.  And what's that?"

They all tumbled up on to the poop at this and found that the rain had
stopped and that Drinian, who was on watch, was also staring hard at
something astern.  Or rather, at several things.  They looked a little
like smooth rounded rocks, a whole line of them with intervals of about
forty feet in between.

"But they can't be rocks," Drinian was saying, "because they weren't
there five minutes ago."

"And one's just disappeared," said Lucy.

"Yes, and there's another one coming up," said Edmund.

"And nearer," said Eustace.

"Hang it!" said Caspian.  "The whole thing is moving this way."

"And moving a great deal quicker than we can sail, Sire," said Drinian.
"It'll be up with us in a minute."

They all held their breath, for it is not at all nice to be pursued by
an unknown something either on land or sea.  But what it turned out to
be was far worse than anyone had suspected.  Suddenly, only about the
length of a cricket pitch from their port side, an appalling head
reared itself out of the sea.  It was all greens and vermilions with
purple blotches--except where shell fish clung to it--and shaped rather
like a horse's, though without ears.  It had enormous eyes, eyes made
for staring through the dark depths of the ocean, and a gaping mouth
filled with double rows of sharp fish-like teeth.  It came up on what
they first took to be a huge neck, but as more and more of it emerged
everyone knew that this was not its neck but its body and that at last
they were seeing what so many people have foolishly wanted to see--the
great Sea Serpent.  The folds of its gigantic tail could be seen far
away, rising at intervals from the surface.  And now its head was
towering up higher than the mast.

Every man rushed to his weapon, but there was nothing to be done, the
monster was out of reach.  "Shoot!  Shoot!" cried the Master Bowman,
and several obeyed, but the arrows glanced off the Sea Serpent's hide
as if it was iron-plated.  Then, for a dreadful minute, everyone was
still, staring up at its eyes and mouth and wondering where it would
pounce.

But it didn't pounce.  It shot its head forward across the ship on a
level with the yard of the mast.  Now its head was just beside the
fighting-top.  Still it stretched and stretched till its head was over
the starboard bulwark.  Then down it began to come--not on to the
crowded deck but into the water, so that the whole ship was under an
arch of serpent.  And almost at once that arch began to get smaller:
indeed on the starboard the Sea Serpent was now almost touching the
_Dawn Treader's_ side.

Eustace (who had really been trying very hard to behave well, till the
rain and the chess put him back) now did the first brave thing he had
ever done.  He was wearing a sword that Caspian had lent him.  As soon
as the serpent's body was near enough on the starboard side he jumped
up on the bulwark and began hacking at it with all his might.  It is
true that he accomplished nothing beyond breaking Caspian's second best
sword into bits, but it was a fine thing for a beginner to have done.

Others would have joined him if at that moment Reepicheep had not
called out, "Don't fight!  Push!"  It was so unusual for the Mouse to
advise anyone not to fight that, even in that terrible moment, every
eye turned to him.  And when he jumped up on the bulwark, forward of
the snake, and set his little furry back against its huge scaly, slimy
back, and began pushing as hard as he could, quite a number of people
saw what he meant and rushed to both sides of the ship to do the same.
And when, a moment later, the Sea Serpent's head appeared again, this
time on the port side, and this time with its back to them, then
everyone understood.

The brute had made a loop of itself round the _Dawn Treader_ and was
beginning to draw the loop tight.  When it got quite
tight--snap!--there would be floating matchwood where the ship had been
and it could pick them out of the water one by one.  Their only chance
was to push the loop backward till it slid over the stern; or else (to
put the same thing another way) to push the ship forward out of the
loop.

Reepicheep alone had, of course, no more chance of doing this than of
lifting up a cathedral, but he had nearly killed himself with trying
before others shoved him aside.  Very soon the whole ship's company
except Lucy and the Mouse (which was fainting) was in two long lines
along the two bulwarks, each man's chest to the back of the man in
front, so that the weight of the whole line was in the last man,
pushing for their lives.  For a few sickening seconds (which seemed
like hours) nothing appeared to happen.  Joints cracked, sweat dropped,
breath came in grunts and gasps.  Then they felt that the ship was
moving.  They saw that the snake-loop was further from the mast than it
had been.  But they also saw that it was smaller.  And now the real
danger was at hand.  Could they get it over the poop, or was it already
too tight?  Yes.  It would just fit.  It was resting on the poop rails.
A dozen or more sprang up on the poop.  This was far better.  The Sea
Serpent's body was so low now that they could make a line across the
poop and push side by side.  Hope rose high till everyone remembered
the high carved stern, the dragon tail, of the _Dawn Treader_.  It
would be quite impossible to get the brute over that.

"An axe," cried Caspian hoarsely, "and still shove."  Lucy, who knew
where everything was, heard him where she was standing on the main deck
staring up at the poop.  In a few seconds she had been below, got the
axe, and was rushing up the ladder to the poop.  But just as she
reached the top there came a great crashing noise like a tree coming
down and the ship rocked and darted forward.  For at that very moment,
whether because the Sea Serpent was being pushed so hard, or because it
foolishly decided to draw the noose tight, the whole of the carved
stern broke off and the ship was free.

The others were too exhausted to see what Lucy saw.  There, a few yards
behind them, the loop of Sea Serpent's body got rapidly smaller and
disappeared into a splash.  Lucy always said (but of course she was
very excited at the moment, and it may have been only imagination) that
she saw a look of idiotic satisfaction on the creature's face.  What is
certain is that it was a very stupid animal, for instead of pursuing
the ship it turned its head round and began nosing all along its own
body as if it expected to find the wreckage of the _Dawn Treader_
there.  But the _Dawn Treader_ was already well away, running before a
fresh breeze, and the men lay and sat panting and groaning all about
the deck, till presently they were able to talk about it, and then to
laugh about it.  And when some rum had been served out they even raised
a cheer; and everyone praised the valour of Eustace (though it hadn't
done any good) and of Reepicheep.

After this they sailed for three days more and saw nothing but sea and
sky.  On the fourth day the wind changed to the north and the seas
began to rise; by the afternoon it had nearly become a gale.  But at
the same time they sighted land on their port bow.

"By your leave, Sire," said Drinian, "we will try to get under the lee
of that country by rowing and lie in harbour, maybe, till this is
over."  Caspian agreed, but a long row against the gale did not bring
them to the land before evening.  By the last light of that day they
steered into a natural harbour and anchored, but no one went ashore
that night.  In the morning they found themselves in the green bay of a
rugged, lonely-looking country which sloped up to a rocky summit.  From
the windy north beyond that summit clouds came streaming rapidly.  They
lowered the boat and loaded her with any of the water casks which were
now empty.

"Which stream shall we water at, Drinian?" said Caspian as he took his
seat in the stern-sheets of the boat.  "There seem to be two coming
down into the bay."

"It makes little odds, Sire," said Drinian.  "But I think it's a
shorter pull to that on the starboard--the eastern one."

"Here comes the rain," said Lucy.

"I should think it does!" said Edmund, for it was already pelting hard.
"I say, let's go to the other stream.  There are trees there and we'll
have some shelter."

"Yes, let's," said Eustace.  "No point in getting wetter than we need."

But all the time Drinian was steadily steering to the starboard, like
tiresome people in cars who continue at forty miles an hour while you
are explaining to them that they are on the wrong road.

"They're right, Drinian," said Caspian.  "Why don't you bring her head
round and make for the western stream?"

"As your Majesty pleases," said Drinian a little shortly.  He had had
an anxious day with the weather yesterday, and he didn't like advice
from landsmen.  But he altered course; and it turned out afterwards
that it was a good thing he did.

By the time they had finished watering, the rain was over and Caspian,
with Eustace, the Pevensies, and Reepicheep, decided to walk up to the
top of the hill and see what could be seen.  It was a stiffish climb
through coarse grass and heather and they saw neither man nor beast,
except sea-gulls.  When they reached the top they saw that it was a
very small island, not more than twenty acres; and from this height the
sea looked larger and more desolate than it did from the deck, or even
the fighting-top of the _Dawn Treader_.

"Crazy, you know," said Eustace to Lucy in a low voice, looking at the
eastern horizon.  "Sailing on and on into that with no idea what we may
get to."  But he only said it out of habit, not really nastily as he
would have done at one time.

It was too cold to stay long on the ridge for the wind still blew
freshly from the north.

"Don't let us go back the same way," said Lucy as they turned; "let's
go along a bit and come down by the other stream, the one Drinian
wanted to go to."

Everyone agreed to this and after about fifteen minutes they were at
the source of the second river.  It was a more interesting place than
they had expected; a deep little mountain lake, surrounded by cliffs
except for a narrow channel on the sea-ward side out of which the water
flowed.  Here at last they were out of the wind, and all sat down in
the heather above the cliff for a rest.

All sat down, but one (it was Edmund) jumped up again very quickly.

"They go in for sharp stones on this island," he said, groping about in
the heather.  "Where is the wretched thing? ... Ah, now I've got it....
Hullo!  It wasn't a stone, at all, it's a sword-hilt.  No, by jove,
it's a whole sword; what the rust has left of it.  It must have lain
here for ages."

"Narnian, too, by the look of it," said Caspian, as they all crowded
round.

"I'm sitting on something too," said Lucy.  "Something hard."  It
turned out to be the remains of a mail-shirt.  By this time everyone
was on hands and knees, feeling in the thick heather in every
direction.  Their search revealed, one by one, a helmet, a dagger, and
a few coins; not Calormen crescents but genuine Narnian "Lions" and
"Trees" such as you might see any day in the market place of Beaversdam
or Beruna.

"Looks as if this might be all that's left of one of our seven lords,"
said Edmund.

"Just what I was thinking," said Caspian.  "I wonder which it was.
There's nothing on the dagger to show.  And I wonder how he died."

"And how we are to avenge him," added Reepicheep.

Edmund, the only one of the party who had read several detective
stories, had meanwhile been thinking.

"Look here," he said, "there's something very fishy about this.  He
can't have been killed in a fight."

"Why not?" asked Caspian.

"No bones," said Edmund.  "An enemy might take the armour and leave the
body.  But who ever heard of a chap who'd won a fight carrying away the
body and leaving the armour?"

"Perhaps he was killed by a wild animal," Lucy suggested.

"It'd be a clever animal," said Edmund, "that would take a man's mail
shirt off."

"Perhaps a dragon?" said Caspian.

"Nothing doing," said Eustace.  "A dragon couldn't do it.  I ought to
know."

"Well, let's get away from the place, anyway," said Lucy.  She had not
felt like sitting down again since Edmund had raised the question of
bones.

"If you like," said Caspian, getting up.  "I don't think any of this
stuff is worth taking away."

They came down and round to the little opening where the stream came
out of the lake, and stood looking at the deep water within the circle
of cliffs.  If it had been a hot day, no doubt some would have been
tempted to bathe and everyone would have had a drink.  Indeed, even as
it was, Eustace was on the very point of stooping down and scooping up
some water in his hands when Reepicheep and Lucy both at the same
moment cried, "Look", so he forgot about his drink and looked.

The bottom of the pool was made of large greyish-blue stones and the
water was perfectly clear, and on the bottom lay a life-size figure of
a man, made apparently of gold.  It lay face downwards with its arms
stretched out above its head.  And it so happened that as they looked
at it, the clouds parted and the sun shone out.  The golden shape was
lit up from end to end.  Lucy thought it was the most beautiful statue
she had ever seen.

"Well!" whistled Caspian.  "That was worth coming to see!  I wonder,
can we get it out?"

"We can dive for it, Sire," said Reepicheep.

"No good at all," said Edmund.  "At least, if it's really gold--solid
gold--it'll be far too heavy to bring up.  And that pool's twelve or
fifteen feet deep if it's an inch.  Half a moment, though.  It's a good
thing I've brought a hunting spear with me.  Let's see what the depth
is like.  Hold on to my hand, Caspian, while I lean out over the water
a bit."  Caspian took his hand and Edmund, leaning forward, began to
lower his spear into the water.

Before it was half-way in Lucy said, "I don't believe the statue is
gold at all.  It's only the light.  Your spear looks just the same
colour."

"What's wrong?" asked several voices at once; for Edmund had suddenly
let go of the spear.

"I couldn't hold it," gasped Edmund, "it seemed so _heavy_."

"And there it is on the bottom now," said Caspian, "and Lucy is right.
It looks just the same colour as the statue."

But Edmund, who appeared to be having some trouble with his boots--at
least he was bending down and looking at them--straightened himself all
at once and shouted out in the sharp voice which people hardly ever
disobey:

"Get back!  Back from the water.  All of you.  At once!!"

They all did and stared at him.

"Look," said Edmund, "look at the toes of my boots."

"They look a bit yellow," began Eustace.

"They're gold, solid gold," interrupted Edmund.  "Look at them.  Feel
them.  The leather's pulled away from it already.  And they're as heavy
as lead."

"By Aslan!" said Caspian.  "You don't mean to say----?"

"Yes, I do," said Edmund.  "That water turns things into gold.  It
turned the spear into gold, that's why it got so heavy.  And it was
just lapping against my feet (it's a good thing I wasn't barefoot) and
it turned the toe-caps into gold.  And that poor fellow on the
bottom--well, you see."

"So it isn't a statue at all," said Lucy in a low voice.

"No.  The whole thing is plain now.  He was here on a hot day.  He
undressed on top of the cliff--where we were sitting.  The clothes have
rotted away or been taken by birds to line nests with; the armour's
still there.  Then he dived and----"

"Don't," said Lucy.  "What a horrible thing."

"And what a narrow shave _we've_ had," said Edmund.

"Narrow indeed," said Reepicheep.  "Anyone's finger, anyone's foot,
anyone's whisker, or anyone's tail, might have slipped into the water
at any moment."

"All the same," said Caspian, "we may as well test it."  He stooped
down and wrenched up a spray of heather.  Then, very cautiously, he
knelt beside the pool and dipped it in.  It was heather that he dipped;
what he drew out was a perfect model of heather made of the purest
gold, heavy and soft as lead.

"The King who owned this island," said Caspian slowly, and his face
flushed as he spoke, "would soon be the richest of all the Kings of the
world.  I claim this land for ever as a Narnian possession.  It shall
be called Goldwater Island.  And I bind all you to secrecy.  No one
must know of this.  Not even Drinian--on pain of death, do you hear?"

"Who are you talking to?" said Edmund.  "I'm no subject of yours.  If
anything it's the other way round.  I am one of the four ancient
sovereigns of Narnia and you are under allegiance to the High King my
brother."

"So it has come to that, King Edmund, has it?" said Caspian, laying his
hand on his sword-hilt.

"Oh, stop it, both of you," said Lucy.  "That's the worst of doing
anything with boys.  You're all such swaggering, bullying
idiots--oooh!----"  Her voice died away into a gasp.  And everyone else
saw what she had seen.

Across the grey hillside above them--grey, for the heather was not yet
in bloom--without noise, and without looking at them, and shining as if
he were in bright sunlight though the sun had in fact gone in, passed
with slow pace the hugest lion that human eyes have ever seen.  In
describing the scene Lucy said afterwards, "He was the size of an
elephant," though at another time she only said, "The size of a
cart-horse."  But it was not the size that mattered.  Nobody dared to
ask what it was.  They knew it was Aslan.

And nobody ever saw how or where he went.  They looked at one another
like people waking from sleep.

"What were we talking about?" said Caspian.  "Have I been making rather
an ass of myself?"

"Sire," said Reepicheep, "this is a place with a curse on it.  Let us
get back on board at once.  And if I might have the honour of naming
this island, I should call it Deathwater."

"That strikes me as a very good name, Reep," said Caspian, "though now
that I come to think of it, I don't know why.  But the weather seems to
be settling and I dare say Drinian would like to be off.  What a lot we
shall have to tell him."

But in fact they had not much to tell him for the memory of the last
hour had all become confused.

"Their Majesties all seemed a bit bewitched when they came aboard,"
said Drinian to Rhince some hours later when the _Dawn Treader_ was
once more under sail and Deathwater Island already below the horizon.
"Something happened to them in that place.  The only thing I could get
clear was that they think they've found the body of one of these lords
we're looking for."

"You don't say so, Captain," answered Rhince.  "Well, that's three.
Only five more.  At this rate we might be home soon after the New Year.
And a good thing too.  My baccy's running a bit low.  Good night, Sir."




_Chapter IX_

THE ISLAND OF THE VOICES

And now the winds which had so long been from the north-west began to
blow from the west itself and every morning when the sun rose out of
the sea the curved prow of the _Dawn Treader_ stood up right across the
middle of the sun.  Some thought that the sun looked larger than it
looked from Narnia, but others disagreed.  And they sailed and sailed
before a gentle yet steady breeze and saw neither fish nor gull nor
ship nor shore.  And stores began to get low again, and it crept into
their hearts that perhaps they might have come to a sea which went on
for ever.  But when the very last day on which they thought they could
risk continuing their eastward voyage dawned, it showed, right ahead
between them and the sunrise, a low land lying like a cloud.

They made harbour in a wide bay about the middle of the afternoon and
landed.  It was a very different country from any they had yet seen.
For when they had crossed the sandy beach they found all silent and
empty as if it were an uninhabited land, but before them there were
level lawns in which the grass was as smooth and short as it used to be
in the grounds of a great English house where ten gardeners were kept.
The trees, of which there were many, all stood well apart from one
another, and there were no broken branches and no leaves lying on the
ground.  Pigeons sometimes cooed but there was no other noise.

Presently they came to a long, straight, sanded path with not a weed
growing on it and trees on either hand.  Far off at the other end of
this avenue they now caught sight of a house--very long and grey and
quiet-looking in the afternoon sun.

Almost as soon as they entered this path Lucy noticed that she had a
little stone in her shoe.  In that unknown place it might have been
wiser for her to ask the others to wait while she took it out.  But she
didn't; she just dropped quietly behind and sat down to take off her
shoe.  Her lace had got into a knot.

Before she had undone the knot the others were a fair distance ahead.
By the time she had got the stone out and was putting the shoe on again
she could no longer hear them.  But almost at once she heard something
else.  It was not coming from the direction of the house.

What she heard was a thumping.  It sounded as if dozens of strong
workmen were hitting the ground as hard as they could with great wooden
mallets.  And it was very quickly coming nearer.  She was already
sitting with her back to a tree, and as the tree was not one she could
climb, there was really nothing to do but to sit dead still and press
herself against the tree and hope she wouldn't be seen.

Thump, thump, thump ... and whatever it was must be very close now for
she could feel the ground shaking.  But she could see nothing.  She
thought the thing--or things--must be just behind her.  But then there
came a thump on the path right in front of her.  She knew it was on the
path not only by the sound but because she saw the sand scatter as if
it had been struck a heavy blow.  But she could see nothing that had
struck it.  Then all the thumping noises drew together about twenty
feet away from her and suddenly ceased.  Then came the Voice.

It was really very dreadful because she could still see nobody at all.
The whole of that park-like country still looked as quiet and empty as
it had looked when they first landed.  Nevertheless, only a few feet
away from her, a voice spoke.  And what it said was:

"Mates, now's our chance."

Instantly a whole chorus of other voices replied, "Hear him.  Hear him.
Now's our chance, he said.  Well done, Chief.  You never said a truer
word."

"What I say," continued the first voice, "is, get down to the shore
between them and their boat, and let every mother's son look to his
weapons.  Catch 'em when they try to put to sea."

"Eh, that's the way," shouted all the other voices.  "You never made a
better plan, Chief.  Keep it up, Chief.  You couldn't have a better
plan than that."

"Lively, then, mates, lively," said the first voice.  "Off we go."

"Right again, Chief," said the others.  "Couldn't have a better order.
Just what we were going to say ourselves.  Off we go."

Immediately the thumping began again--very loud at first but soon
fainter and fainter, till it died out in the direction of the sea.

Lucy knew there was no time to sit puzzling as to what these invisible
creatures might be.  As soon as the thumping noise had died away she
got up and ran along the path after the others as quickly as her legs
would carry her.  They must at all costs be warned.

While this had been happening the others had reached the house.  It was
a low building--only two stories high--made of a beautiful mellow
stone, many windowed, and partially covered with ivy.  Everything was
so still that Eustace said, "I think it's empty," but Caspian silently
pointed to the column of smoke which rose from one chimney.

They found a wide gateway open and passed through it into a paved
courtyard.  And it was here that they had their first indication that
there was something odd about this island.  In the middle of the
courtyard stood a pump, and beneath the pump a bucket.  There was
nothing odd about that.  But the pump handle was moving up and down,
though there seemed to be no one moving it.

"There's some magic at work here," said Caspian.

"Machinery!" said Eustace.  "I do believe we've come to a civilised
country at last."

At that moment Lucy, hot and breathless, rushed into the courtyard
behind them.  In a low voice she tried to make them understand what she
had overheard.  And when they had partly understood it even the bravest
of them did not look very happy.

"Invisible enemies," muttered Caspian.  "And cutting us off from the
boat.  This is an ugly furrow to plough."

"You've no idea what sort of creatures they are, Lu?" asked Edmund.

"How can I, Ed, when I couldn't see them?"

"Did they sound like humans from their footsteps?"

"I didn't hear any noise of feet--only voices and this frightful
thudding and thumping--like a mallet."

"I wonder," said Reepicheep, "do they become visible when you drive a
sword into them?"

"It looks as if we shall find out," said Caspian.  "But let's get out
of this gateway.  There's one of these gentry at that pump listening to
all we say."

They came out and went back into the path where the trees might
possibly make them less conspicuous.  "Not that it's any good
_really_," said Eustace, "trying to hide from people you can't see.
They may be all round us."

"Now, Drinian," said Caspian.  "How would it be if we gave up the boat
for lost, went down to another part of the bay, and signalled to the
_Dawn Treader_ to stand in and take us aboard?"

"Not depth for her, Sire," said Drinian.

"We could swim," said Lucy.

"Your Majesties all," said Reepicheep, "hear me.  It is folly to think
of avoiding an invisible enemy by any amount of creeping and skulking.
If these creatures mean to bring us to battle, be sure they will
succeed.  And whatever comes of it I'd sooner meet them face to face
than be caught by the tail."

"I really think Reep is in the right this time," said Edmund.

"Surely," said Lucy, "if Rhince and the others on the _Dawn Treader_
see us fighting on the shore they'll be able to do _something_."

"But they won't see us fighting if they can't see any enemy," said
Eustace miserably.  "They'll think we're just swinging our swords in
the air for fun."

There was an uncomfortable pause.

"Well," said Caspian at last, "let's get on with it.  We must go and
face them.  Shake hands all round--arrow on the string, Lucy--swords
out, everyone else--and now for it.  Perhaps they'll parley."

It was strange to see the lawns and the great trees looking so peaceful
as they marched back to the beach.  And when they arrived there, and
saw the boat lying where they had left her, and the smooth sand with no
one to be seen on it, more than one doubted whether Lucy had not merely
imagined all she had told them.  But before they reached the sand, a
voice spoke out of the air.

"No further, masters, no further now," it said.  "We've got to talk
with you first.  There's fifty of us and more here with weapons in our
fists."

"Hear him, hear him," came the chorus.  "That's our Chief.  You can
depend on what he says.  He's telling you the truth, he is."

"I do not see these fifty warriors," observed Reepicheep.

"That's right, that's right," said the Chief Voice.  "You don't see us.
And why not?  Because we're invisible."

"Keep it up, Chief, keep it up," said the Other Voices.  "You're
talking like a book.  They couldn't ask for a better answer than that."

"Be quiet, Reep," said Caspian, and then added in a louder voice, "You
invisible people, what do you want with us?  And what have we done to
earn your enmity."

"We want something that little girl can do for us," said the Chief
Voice.  (The others explained that this was just what they would have
said themselves.)

"Little girl!" said Reepicheep.  "The lady is a queen."

"We don't know about queens," said the Chief Voice.  ("No more we do,
no more we do," chimed in the others.)  "But we want something she can
do."

"What is it?" said Lucy.

"And if it is anything against her Majesty's honour or safety," added
Reepicheep, "you will wonder to see how many we can kill before we die."

"Well," said the Chief Voice.  "It's a long story.  Suppose we all sit
down?"

The proposal was warmly approved by the other voices but the Narnians
remained standing.

"Well," said the Chief Voice.  "It's like this.  This island has been
the property of a great magician time out of mind.  And we all are--or
perhaps in a manner of speaking, I might say, we were--his servants.
Well, to cut a long story short, this magician that I was speaking
about, he told us to do something we didn't like.  And why not?
Because we didn't want to.  Well, then, this same magician he fell into
a great rage; for I ought to tell you he owned the island and he wasn't
used to being crossed.  He was terribly downright, you know.  But let
me see, where am I?  Oh yes, this magician then, he goes upstairs (for
you must know he kept all his magic things up there and we all lived
down below), I say he goes upstairs and puts a spell on us.  An
uglifying spell.  If you saw us now, which in my opinion you may thank
your stars you can't, you wouldn't believe what we looked like before
we were uglified.  You wouldn't really.  So there we all were so ugly
we couldn't bear to look at one another.  So then what did we do?
Well, I'll tell you what we did.  We waited till we thought this same
magician would be asleep in the afternoon and we creep upstairs and go
to his magic book, as bold as brass, to see if we can do anything about
this uglification.  But we were all of a sweat and a tremble, so I
won't deceive you.  But, believe me or believe me not, I do assure you
that we couldn't find anything in the way of a spell for taking off the
ugliness.  And what with time getting on and being afraid that the old
gentleman might wake up any minute--I was all of a muck sweat, so I
won't deceive you--well, to cut a long story short, whether we did
right or whether we did wrong, in the end we see a spell for making
people invisible.  And we thought we'd rather be invisible than go on
being as ugly as all that.  And why?  Because we'd like it better.  So
my little girl, who's just about your little girl's age, and a sweet
child she was before she was uglified, though now--but least said
soonest mended--I say, my little girl she says the spell, for it's got
to be a little girl or else the magician himself, if you see my
meaning, for otherwise it won't work.  And why not?  Because nothing
happens.  So my Clipsie says the spell, for I ought to have told you
she reads beautifully, and there we all were as invisible as you could
wish to see.  And I do assure you it was a relief not to see one
another's faces.  At first, anyway.  But the long and the short of it
is we're mortal tired of being invisible.  And there's another thing.
We never reckoned on this magician (the one I was telling you about
before) going invisible too.  But we haven't ever seen him since.  So
we don't know if he's dead, or gone away, or whether he's just sitting
upstairs being invisible, and perhaps coming down and being invisible
there.  And, believe me, it's no manner of use listening because he
always did go about with his bare feet on, making no more noise than a
great big cat.  And I'll tell all you gentlemen straight, it's getting
more than what our nerves can stand."

Such was the Chief Voice's story, but very much shortened, because I
have left out what the other voices said.  Actually he never got out
more than six or seven words without being interrupted by their
agreements and encouragements, which drove the Narnians nearly out of
their minds with impatience.  When it was over there was a very long
silence.

"But," said Lucy at last, "what's all this got to do with us?  I don't
understand."

"Why, bless me, if I haven't gone and left out the whole point," said
the Chief Voice.

"That you have, that you have," roared the Other Voices with great
enthusiasm.  "No one couldn't have left it out cleaner and better.
Keep it up, Chief, keep it up."

"Well, I needn't go over the whole story again," began the Chief Voice.

"No.  Certainly not," said Caspian and Edmund.

"Well, then, to put it in a nutshell," said the Chief Voice, "we've
been waiting for ever so long for a nice little girl from foreign
parts, like it might be you, Missie--that would go upstairs and go to
the magic book and find the spell that takes off the invisibleness, and
say it.  And we all swore that the first strangers as landed on this
island (having a nice little girl with them, I mean, for if they hadn't
it'd be another matter) we wouldn't let them go away alive unless
they'd done the needful for us.  And that's why, gentlemen, if your
little girl doesn't come up to scratch, it will be our painful duty to
cut all your throats.  Merely in the way of business, as you might say,
and no offence, I hope."

"I don't see all your weapons," said Reepicheep.  "Are they invisible
too?"  The words were scarcely out of his mouth before they heard a
whizzing sound and next moment a spear had stuck, quivering, in one of
the trees behind them.

"That's a spear, that is," said the Chief Voice.

"That it is, Chief, that it is," said the others.  "You couldn't have
put it better."

"And it came from my hand," the Chief Voice continued.  "They get
visible when they leave us."

"But why do you want _me_ to do this?" asked Lucy.  "Why can't one of
your own people?  Haven't you got any girls?"

"We dursen't, we dursen't," said all the Voices.  "We're not going
upstairs again."

"In other words," said Caspian, "you are asking this lady to face some
danger which you daren't ask your own sisters and daughters to face!"

"That's right, that's right," said all the Voices cheerfully.  "You
couldn't have said it better.  Eh, you've had some education, you have.
Anyone can see that."

"Well, of all the outrageous----" began Edmund, but Lucy interrupted.

"Would I have to go upstairs at night, or would it do in daylight?"

"Oh, daylight, daylight, to be sure," said the Chief Voice.  "Not at
night.  No one's asking you to do that.  Go upstairs in the dark?  Ugh."

"All right, then, I'll do it," said Lucy.  "No," she said, turning to
the others, "don't try to stop me.  Can't you see it's no use?  There
are dozens of them there.  We can't fight them.  And the other way
there _is_ a chance."

"But a magician!" said Caspian.

"I know," said Lucy.  "But he mayn't be as bad as they make out.  Don't
you get the idea that these people are not very brave?"

"They're certainly not very clever," said Eustace.

"Look here, Lu," said Edmund.  "We really can't let you do a thing like
this.  Ask Reep, I'm sure he'll say just the same."

"But it's to save my own life as well as yours," said Lucy.  "I don't
want to be cut to bits with invisible swords any more than anyone else."

"Her Majesty is in the right," said Reepicheep.  "If we had any
assurance of saving _her_ by battle, our duty would be very plain.  It
appears to me that we have none.  And the service they ask of her is in
no way contrary to her Majesty's honour, but a noble and heroical act.
If the Queen's heart moves her to risk the magician, I will not speak
against it."

As no one had ever known Reepicheep to be afraid of anything, he could
say this without feeling at all awkward.  But the boys who had all been
afraid quite often, grew very red.  None the less, it was such obvious
sense that they had to give in.  Loud cheers broke from the invisible
people when their decision was announced, and the Chief Voice (warmly
supported by all the others) invited the Narnians to come to supper and
spend the night.  Eustace didn't want to accept, but Lucy said, "I'm
sure they're not treacherous.  They're not like that at all," and the
others agreed.  And so, accompanied by an enormous noise of thumpings
(which became louder when they reached the flagged and echoing
courtyard) they all went back to the house.




_Chapter X_

THE MAGICIAN'S BOOK

The invisible people feasted their guests royally.  It was very funny
to see the plates and dishes coming to the table and not to see anyone
carrying them.  It would have been funny even if they had moved along
level with the floor, as you would expect things to do in invisible
hands.  But they didn't.  They progressed up the long dining-hall in a
series of bounds or jumps.  At the highest point of each jump a dish
would be about fifteen feet up in the air; then it would come down and
stop quite suddenly about three feet from the floor.  When the dish
contained anything like soup or stew the result was rather disastrous.

"I'm beginning to feel very inquisitive about these people," whispered
Eustace to Edmund.  "Do you think they're human at all?  More like huge
grasshoppers or giant frogs, I should say."

"It does look like it," said Edmund.  "But don't put the idea of the
grasshoppers into Lucy's head.  She's not too keen on insects;
specially big ones."

The meal would have been pleasanter if it had not been so exceedingly
messy, and also if the conversation had not consisted entirely of
agreements.  The invisible people agreed about everything.  Indeed most
of their remarks were the sort it would not be easy to disagree with:
"What I always say is, when a chap's hungry, he likes some victuals",
or "Getting dark now; always does at night", or even "Ah, you've come
over the water.  Powerful wet stuff, ain't it?"  And Lucy could not
help looking at the dark yawning entrance to the foot of the
staircase--she could see it from where she sat--and wondering what she
would find when she went up those stairs next morning.  But it was a
good meal otherwise, with mushroom soup and boiled chickens and hot
boiled ham and gooseberries, red currants, curds, cream, milk, and
mead.  The others liked the mead but Eustace was sorry afterwards that
he had drunk any.

When Lucy woke up next morning it was like waking up on the day of an
examination or a day when you are going to the dentist.  It was a
lovely morning with bees buzzing in and out of her open window and the
lawn outside looking very like somewhere in England.  She got up and
dressed and tried to talk and eat ordinarily at breakfast.  Then, after
being instructed by the Chief Voice about what she was to do upstairs,
she bid good-bye to the others, said nothing, walked to the bottom of
the stairs, and began going up them without once looking back.

It was quite light, that was one good thing.  There was, indeed, a
window straight ahead of her at the top of the first flight.  As long
as she was on that flight she could hear the _tick-tock-tick-tock_ of a
grandfather clock in the hall below.  Then she came to the landing and
had to turn to her left up the next flight; after that she couldn't
hear the clock any more.

Now she had come to the top of the stairs.  Lucy looked and saw a long,
wide passage with a large window at the far end.  Apparently the
passage ran the whole length of the house.  It was carved and panelled
and carpeted and very many doors opened off it on each side.  She stood
still and couldn't hear the squeak of a mouse, or the buzzing of a fly,
or the swaying of a curtain, or anything--except the beating of her own
heart.

"The last doorway on the left," she said to herself.  It did seem a bit
hard that it should be the last.  To reach it she would have to walk
past room after room.  And in any room there might be the
magician--asleep, or awake, or invisible, or even dead.  But it
wouldn't do to think about that.  She set out on her journey.  The
carpet was so thick that her feet made no noise.

"There's nothing whatever to be afraid of yet," Lucy told herself.  And
certainly it was a quiet, sunlit passage; perhaps a bit too quiet.  It
would have been nicer if there had not been strange signs painted in
scarlet on the doors--twisty, complicated things which obviously had a
meaning and it mightn't be a very nice meaning either.  It would have
been nicer still if there weren't those masks hanging on the wall.  Not
that they were exactly ugly--or not so very ugly--but the empty
eye-holes did look queer, and if you let yourself you would soon start
imagining that the masks were doing things as soon as your back was
turned to them.

After about the sixth door she got her first real fright.  For one
second she felt almost certain that a wicked little bearded face had
popped out of the wall and made a grimace at her.  She forced herself
to stop and look at it.  And it was not a face at all.  It was a little
mirror just the size and shape of her own face, with hair on the top of
it and a beard hanging down from it, so that when you looked in the
mirror your own face fitted into the hair and beard and it looked as if
they belonged to you.  "I just caught my own reflection with the tail
of my eye as I went past," said Lucy to herself.  "That was all it was.
It's quite harmless."  But she didn't like the look of her own face
with that hair and beard, and went on.  (I don't know what the Bearded
Glass was for because I am not a magician.)

Before she reached the last door on the left Lucy was beginning to
wonder whether the corridor had grown longer since she began her
journey and whether this was part of the magic of the house.  But she
got to it at last.  And the door was open.

It was a large room with three big windows and it was lined from floor
to ceiling with books; more books than Lucy had ever seen before, tiny
little books, fat and dumpy books, and books bigger than any church
Bible you have ever seen, all bound in leather and smelling old and
learned and magical.  But she knew from her instructions that she need
not bother about any of these.  For the Book, the Magic Book, was lying
on a reading-desk in the very middle of the room.  She saw she would
have to read it standing (and anyway there were no chairs) and also
that she would have to stand with her back to the door while she read
it.  So at once she turned to shut the door.

It wouldn't shut.

Some people may disagree with Lucy about this, but I think she was
quite right.  She said she wouldn't have minded if she could have shut
the door, but that it was unpleasant to have to stand in a place like
that with an open doorway right behind your back.  I should have felt
just the same.  But there was nothing else to be done.

One thing that worried her a good deal was the size of the Book.  The
Chief Voice had not been able to give her any idea whereabouts in the
Book the spell for making things visible came.  He even seemed rather
surprised at her asking.  He expected her to begin at the beginning and
go on till she came to it; obviously he had never thought that there
was any other way of finding a place in a book.  "But it might take me
days and weeks!" said Lucy, looking at the huge volume, "and I feel
already as if I'd been in this place for hours."

She went up to the desk and laid her hand on the book; her fingers
tingled when she touched it as if it were full of electricity.  She
tried to open it but couldn't at first; this, however, was only because
it was fastened by two leaden clasps, and when she had undone these it
opened easily enough.  And what a book it was!

It was written, not printed; written in a clear, even hand, with thick
downstrokes and thin upstrokes, very large, easier than print, and so
beautiful that Lucy stared at it for a whole minute and forgot about
reading it.  The paper was crisp and smooth and a nice smell came from
it; and in the margins, and round the big coloured capital letters at
the beginning of each spell, there were pictures.

There was no title page or title; the spells began straight away, and
at first there was nothing very important in them.  They were cures for
warts (by washing your hands in moonlight in a silver basin) and
toothache and cramp, and a spell for taking a swarm of bees.  The
picture of the man with toothache was so lifelike that it would have
set your own teeth aching if you looked at it too long, and the golden
bees which were dotted all round the fourth spell looked for a moment
as if they were really flying.

Lucy could hardly tear herself away from that first page, but when she
turned over, the next was just as interesting.  "But I must get on,"
she told herself.  And on she went for about thirty pages which, if she
could have remembered them, would have taught her how to find buried
treasure, how to remember things forgotten, how to forget things you
wanted to forget, how to tell whether anyone was speaking the truth,
how to call up (or prevent) wind, fog, snow, sleet or rain, how to
produce enchanted sleeps and how to give a man an ass's head (as they
did to poor Bottom).  And the longer she read the more wonderful and
more real the pictures became.

Then she came to a page which was such a blaze of pictures that one
hardly noticed the writing.  Hardly--but she did notice the first
words.  They were, _An infallible spell to make beautiful her that
uttereth it beyond the lot of mortals_.  Lucy peered at the pictures
with her face close to the page, and though they had seemed crowded and
muddlesome before, she found she could now see them quite clearly.  The
first was a picture of a girl standing at a reading-desk reading in a
huge book.  And the girl was dressed exactly like Lucy.  In the next
picture Lucy (for the girl in the picture was Lucy herself) was
standing up with her mouth open and a rather terrible expression on her
face, chanting or reciting something.  In the third picture the beauty
beyond the lot of mortals had come to her.  It was strange, considering
how small the pictures had looked at first, that the Lucy in the
picture now seemed quite as big as the real Lucy; and they looked into
each other's eyes and the real Lucy looked away after a few minutes
because she was dazzled by the beauty of the other Lucy; though she
could still see a sort of likeness to herself in that beautiful face.
And now the pictures came crowding on her thick and fast.  She saw
herself throned on high at a great tournament in Calormen and all the
Kings of the world fought because of her beauty.  After that it turned
from tournaments to real wars, and all Narnia and Archenland, Telmar
and Calormen, Galma and Terebinthia, were laid waste with the fury of
the kings and dukes and great lords who fought for her favour.  Then it
changed and Lucy, still beautiful beyond the lot of mortals, was back
in England.  And Susan (who had always been the beauty of the family)
came home from America.  The Susan in the picture looked exactly like
the real Susan only plainer and with a nasty expression.  And Susan was
jealous of the dazzling beauty of Lucy, but that didn't matter a bit
because no one cared anything about Susan now.

"I _will_ say the spell," said Lucy.  "I don't care.  I will."  She
said I _don't care_ because she had a strong feeling that she mustn't.

But when she looked back at the opening words of the spell, there in
the middle of the writing, where she felt quite sure there had been no
picture before, she found the great face of a lion, of The Lion, Aslan
himself, staring into hers.  It was painted such a bright gold that it
seemed to be coming towards her out of the page; and indeed she never
was quite sure afterwards that it hadn't really moved a little.  At any
rate she knew the expression on his face quite well.  He was growling
and you could see most of his teeth.  She became horribly afraid and
turned over the page at once.

A little later she came to a spell which would let you know what your
friends thought about you.  Now Lucy had wanted very badly to try the
other spell, the one that made you beautiful beyond the lot of mortals.
So she felt that to make up for not having said it, she really would
say this one.  And all in a hurry, for fear her mind would change, she
said the words (nothing will induce me to tell you what they were).
Then she waited for something to happen.

As nothing happened she began looking at the pictures.  And all at once
she saw the very last thing she expected--a picture of a third class
carriage in a train, with two schoolgirls sitting in it.  She knew them
at once.  They were Marjorie Preston and Anne Featherstone.  Only now
it was much more than a picture.  It was alive.  She could see the
telegraph posts flicking past outside the window.  She could see the
two girls laughing and talking.  Then gradually (like when the radio is
"coming on") she could hear what they were saying.

"Shall I see anything of you this term?" said Anne, "or are you still
going to be all taken up with Lucy Pevensie."

"Don't know what you mean by _taken up_," said Marjorie.

"Oh yes, you do," said Anne.  "You were crazy about her last term."

"No, I wasn't," said Marjorie.  "I've got more sense than that.  Not a
bad little kid in her way.  But I was getting pretty tired of her
before the end of term."

"Well, you jolly well won't have the chance any other term!" shouted
Lucy.  "Two-faced little beast."  But the sound of her own voice at
once reminded her that she was talking to a picture and that the real
Marjorie was far away in another world.

"Well," said Lucy to herself, "I did think better of her than that.
And I did all sorts of things for her last term, and I stuck to her
when not many other girls would.  And she knows it too.  And to Anne
Featherstone of all people!  I wonder are all my friends the same?
There are lots of other pictures.  No.  I won't look at any more.  I
won't, I won't"--and with a great effort she turned over the page; but
not before a large, angry tear had splashed on it.

On the next page she came to a spell "for the refreshment of the
spirit".  The pictures were fewer here but very beautiful.  And what
Lucy found herself reading was more like a story than a spell.  It went
on for three pages and before she had read to the bottom of the page
she had forgotten that she was reading at all.  She was living in the
story as if it were real, and all the pictures were real too.  When she
had got to the third page and come to the end, she said, "That is the
loveliest story I've ever read or ever shall read in my whole life.
Oh, I wish I could have gone on reading it for ten years.  At least
I'll read it over again."

But here part of the magic of the Book came into play.  You couldn't
turn back.  The right-hand pages, the ones ahead, could be turned; the
left-hand pages could not.

"Oh, what a shame!" said Lucy.  "I did so want to read it again.  Well,
at least, I must remember it.  Let's see ... it was about ... about ...
oh dear, it's all fading away again.  And even this last page is going
blank.  This is a very queer book.  How can I have forgotten?  It was
about a cup and a sword and a tree and a green hill, I know that much.
But I can't remember and what _shall_ I do?"

And she never could remember; and ever since that day what Lucy means
by a good story is a story which reminds her of the forgotten story in
the Magician's Book.

She turned on and found to her surprise a page with no pictures at all;
but the first words were _A Spell to make hidden things visible_.  She
read it through to make sure of all the hard words and then said it out
loud.  And she knew at once that it was working because as she spoke
the colours came into the capital letters at the top of the page and
the pictures began appearing in the margins.  It was like when you hold
to the fire something written in Invisible Ink and the writing
gradually shows up; only instead of the dingy colour of lemon juice
(which is the easiest Invisible Ink) this was all gold and blue and
scarlet.  They were odd pictures and contained many figures that Lucy
did not much like the look of.  And then she thought, "I suppose I've
made everything visible, and not only the Thumpers.  There might be
lots of other invisible things hanging about a place like this.  I'm
not sure that I want to see them all."

At that moment she heard soft, heavy footfalls coming along the
corridor behind her; and of course she remembered what she had been
told about the Magician walking in his bare feet and making no more
noise than a cat.  It is always better to turn round than to have
anything creeping up behind your back.  Lucy did so.

Then her face lit up till, for a moment (but of course she didn't know
it), she looked almost as beautiful as that other Lucy in the picture,
and she ran forward with a little cry of delight and with her arms
stretched out.  For what stood in the doorway was Aslan himself, the
Lion, the highest of all High Kings.  And he was solid and real and
warm and he let her kiss him and bury herself in his shining mane.  And
from the low, earthquake-like sound that came from inside him, Lucy
even dared to think that he was purring.

"Oh, Aslan," said she, "it was kind of you to come."

"I have been here all the time," said he, "but you have just made me
visible."

"Aslan!" said Lucy almost a little reproachfully.  "Don't make fun of
me.  As if anything _I_ could do would make _you_ visible!"

"It did," said Aslan.  "Do you think I wouldn't obey my own rules?"

After a little pause he spoke again.

"Child," he said, "I think you have been eavesdropping."

"Eavesdropping?"

"You listened to what your two schoolfellows were saying about you."

"Oh that?  I never thought that was eavesdropping, Aslan.  Wasn't it
magic?"

"Spying on people by magic is the same as spying on them in any other
way.  And you have misjudged your friend.  She is weak, but she loves
you.  She was afraid of the older girl and said what she does not mean."

"I don't think I'd ever be able to forget what I heard her say."

"No, you won't."

"Oh dear," said Lucy.  "Have I spoiled everything?  Do you mean we
would have gone on being friends if it hadn't been for this--and been
really great friends--all our lives perhaps--and now we never shall."

"Child," said Aslan, "did I not explain to you once before that no one
is ever told what _would have happened_?"

"Yes, Aslan, you did," said Lucy.  "I'm sorry.  But please----"

"Speak on, dear heart."

"Shall I ever be able to read that story again; the one I couldn't
remember?  Will you tell it to me, Aslan?  Oh do, do, do."

"Indeed, yes, I will tell it to you for years and years.  But now,
come.  We must meet the master of this house."




_Chapter XI_

THE DUFFLEPUDS MADE HAPPY

Lucy followed the great Lion out into the passage and at once she saw
coming towards them an old man, barefoot, dressed in a red robe.  His
white hair was crowned with a chaplet of oakleaves, his beard fell to
his girdle, and he supported himself with a curiously carved staff.
When he saw Aslan he bowed low and said,

"Welcome, Sir, to the least of your houses."

"Do you grow weary, Coriakin, of ruling such foolish subjects as I have
given you here?"

"No," said the Magician, "they are very stupid but there is no real
harm in them.  I begin to grow rather fond of the creatures.
Sometimes, perhaps, I am a little impatient, waiting for the day when
they can be governed by wisdom instead of this rough magic."

"All in good time, Coriakin," said Aslan.

"Yes, all in very good time, Sir," was the answer.  "Do you intend to
show yourself to them?"

"Nay," said the Lion, with a little half growl that meant (Lucy
thought) the same as a laugh.  "I should frighten them out of their
senses.  Many stars will grow old and come to take their rest in
islands before your people are ripe for that.  And to-day before sunset
I must visit Trumpkin the Dwarf where he sits in the castle of Cair
Paravel counting the days till his master Caspian comes home.  I will
tell him all your story, Lucy.  Do not look so sad.  We shall meet soon
again."

"Please, Aslan," said Lucy, "what do you call soon?"

"I call all times soon," said Aslan; and instantly he was vanished away
and Lucy was alone with the Magician.

"Gone!" said he, "and you and I quite crestfallen.  It's always like
that, you can't keep him; it's not as if he were a _tame_ lion.  And
how did you enjoy my book?"

"Parts of it very much indeed," said Lucy.  "Did you know I was there
all the time?"

"Well, of course I knew when I let the Duffers make themselves
invisible that you would be coming along presently to take the spell
off.  I wasn't quite sure of the exact day.  And I wasn't especially on
the watch this morning.  You see they had made me invisible too and
being invisible always makes me so sleepy.  Heigh-ho--there I'm yawning
again.  Are you hungry?"

"Well, perhaps I am a little," said Lucy.  "I've no idea what the time
is."

"Come," said the Magician.  "All times may be soon to Aslan; but in my
home all hungry times are one o'clock."

He led her a little way down the passage and opened a door.  Passing
in, Lucy found herself in a pleasant room full of sunlight and flowers.
The table was bare when they entered, but it was of course a magic
table, and at a word from the old man the tablecloth, silver, plates,
glasses and food appeared.

"I hope that is what you would like," said he.  "I have tried to give
you food more like the food of your own land than perhaps you have had
lately."

"It's lovely," said Lucy, and so it was; an omelette, piping hot, cold
lamb and green peas, a strawberry ice, lemon-squash to drink with the
meal and a cup of chocolate to follow.  But the magician himself drank
only wine and ate only bread.  There was nothing alarming about him,
and Lucy and he were soon chatting away like old friends.

"When will the spell work?" asked Lucy.  "Will the Duffers be visible
again at once?"

"Oh yes, they're visible now.  But they're probably all asleep still;
they always take a rest in the middle of the day."

"And now that they're visible, are you going to let them off being
ugly?  Will you make them as they were before?"

"Well, that's rather a delicate question," said the Magician.  "You
see, it's only _they_ who think they were so nice to look at before.
They say they've been uglified, but that isn't what I called it.  Many
people might say the change was for the better."

"Are they awfully conceited?"

"They are.  Or at least the Chief Duffer is, and he's taught all the
rest to be.  They always believe every word he says."

"We'd noticed that," said Lucy.

"Yes--we'd get on better without him, in a way.  Of course I could turn
him into something else, or even put a spell on him which would make
them not believe a word he said.  But I don't like to do that.  It's
better for them to admire him than to admire nobody."

"Don't they admire _you_?" asked Lucy.

"Oh, not _me_," said the Magician.  "They wouldn't admire _me_."

"What was it you uglified them for--I mean, what they call _uglified_?"

"Well, they wouldn't do what they were told.  Their work is to mind the
garden and raise food--not for me, as they imagine, but for themselves.
They wouldn't do it at all if I didn't make them.  And of course for a
garden you want water.  There is a beautiful spring about half a mile
away up the hill.  And from that spring there flows a stream which
comes right past the garden.  All I asked them to do was to take their
water from the stream instead of trudging up to the spring with their
buckets two or three times a day and tiring themselves out besides
spilling half of it on the way back.  But they wouldn't see it.  In the
end they refused point blank."

"Are they as stupid as all that?" asked Lucy.

The Magician sighed.  "You wouldn't believe the troubles I've had with
them.  A few months ago they were all for washing up the plates and
knives before dinner: they said it saved time afterwards.  I've caught
them planting boiled potatoes to save cooking them when they were dug
up.  One day the cat got into the dairy and twenty of them were at work
moving all the milk out; no one thought of moving the cat.  But I see
you've finished.  Let's go and look at the Duffers now they can be
looked at."

They went into another room which was full of polished instruments hard
to understand--such as Astrolabes, Orreries, Chronoscopes, Poesimeters,
Choriambuses and Theodolinds--and here, when they had come to the
window the Magician said, "There.  There are your Duffers."

"I don't see anybody," said Lucy.  "And what are those mushroom things?"

The things she pointed at were dotted all over the level grass.  They
were certainly very like mushrooms, but far too big--the stalks about
three feet high and the umbrellas about the same length from edge to
edge.  When she looked carefully she noticed too that the stalks joined
the umbrellas not in the middle but at one side which gave an
unbalanced look to them.  And there was something--a sort of little
bundle--lying on the grass at the foot of each stalk.  In fact the
longer she gazed at them the less like mushrooms they appeared.  The
umbrella part was not really round as she had thought at first.  It was
longer than it was broad, and it widened at one end.  There were a
great many of them, fifty or more.

The clock struck three.

Instantly a most extraordinary thing happened.  Each of the "mushrooms"
suddenly turned upside-down.  The little bundles which had lain at the
bottom of the stalks were heads and bodies.  The stalks themselves were
legs.  But not two legs to each body.  Each body had a single thick leg
right under it (not to one side like the leg of a one-legged man) and
at the end of it, a single enormous foot--a broad-toed foot with the
toes curling up a little so that it looked rather like a small canoe.
She saw in a moment why they had looked like mushrooms.  They had been
lying flat on their backs each with its single leg straight up in the
air and its enormous foot spread out above it.  She learned afterwards
that this was their ordinary way of resting; for the foot kept off both
rain and sun and for a Monopod to lie under its own foot is almost as
good as being in a tent.

"Oh, the funnies, the funnies," cried Lucy, bursting into laughter.
"Did _you_ make them like that?"

"Yes, yes, I made the Duffers into Monopods," said the Magician.  He
too was laughing till the tears ran down his cheeks.  "But watch," he
added.

It was worth watching.  Of course these little one-footed men couldn't
walk or run as we do.  They got about by jumping, like fleas or frogs.
And what jumps they made!--as if each big foot were a mass of springs.
And with what a bounce they came down; that was what made the thumping
noise which had so puzzled Lucy yesterday.  For now they were jumping
in all directions and calling out to one another, "Hey, lads!  We're
visible again."

"Visible we are," said one in a tasselled red cap who was obviously the
Chief Monopod.  "And what I say is, when chaps are visible, why they
can see one another."

"Ah, there it is, there it is, Chief," cried all the others.  "There's
the point.  No one's got a clearer head than you.  You couldn't have
made it plainer."

"She caught the old man napping, that little girl did," said the Chief
Monopod.  "We've beaten him this time."

"Just what we were going to say ourselves," chimed the chorus.  "You're
going stronger than ever to-day, Chief.  Keep it up, keep it up."

"But do they dare to talk about you like that?" said Lucy.  "They
seemed to be so afraid of you yesterday.  Don't they know you might be
listening?"

"That's one of the funny things about the Duffers," said the Magician.
"One minute they talk as if I ran everything and overheard everything
and was extremely dangerous.  The next moment they think they can take
me in by tricks that a baby would see through--bless them!"

"Will they have to be turned back into their proper shapes?" asked
Lucy.  "Oh, I do hope it wouldn't be unkind to leave them as they are.
Do they really mind very much?  They seem pretty happy.  I say--look at
that jump.  What were they like before?"

"Common little dwarfs," said he.  "Nothing like so nice as the sort you
have in Narnia."

"It _would_ be a pity to change them back," said Lucy.  "They're so
funny: and they're rather nice.  Do you think it would make any
difference if I told them that?"

"I'm sure it would--if you could get it into their heads."

"Will you come with me and try?"

"No, no.  You'll get on far better without me."

"Thanks awfully for the lunch," said Lucy and turned quickly away.  She
ran down the stairs which she had come up so nervously that morning and
cannoned into Edmund at the bottom.  All the others were there with him
waiting, and Lucy's conscience smote her when she saw their anxious
faces and realised how long she had forgotten them.

"It's all right," she shouted.  "Everything's all right.  The
Magician's a brick--and I've seen _him_--Aslan."

After that she went from them like the wind and out into the garden.
Here the earth was shaking with the jumps and the air ringing with the
shouts of the Monopods.  Both were redoubled when they caught sight of
her.

"Here she comes, here she comes," they cried.  "Three cheers for the
little girl.  Ah!  She put it across the old gentleman properly, she
did."

"And we're extremely regrettable," said the Chief Monopod, "that we
can't give you the pleasure of seeing us as we were before we were
uglified, for you wouldn't believe the difference, and that's the
truth, for there's no denying we're mortal ugly now, so we won't
deceive you."

"Eh, that we are, Chief, that we are," echoed the others, bouncing like
so many toy balloons.  "You've said it, you've said it."

"But I don't think you are at all," said Lucy, shouting to make herself
heard.  "I think you look very nice."

"Hear her, hear her," said the Monopods.  "True for you, Missie.  Very
nice we look.  You couldn't find a handsomer lot."  They said this
without any surprise and did not seem to notice that they had changed
their minds.

"She's a-saying," remarked the Chief Monopod, "as how we looked very
nice before we were uglified."

"True for you, Chief, true for you," chanted the others.  "That's what
she says.  We heard her ourselves."

"I did _not_," bawled Lucy.  "I said you're very nice _now_."

"So she did, so she did," said the Chief Monopod, "said we were very
nice then."

"Hear 'em both, hear 'em both," said the Monopods.  "There's a pair for
you.  Always right.  They couldn't have put it better."

"But we're saying just the opposite," said Lucy, stamping her foot with
impatience.

"So you are, to be sure, so you are," said the Monopods.  "Nothing like
an opposite.  Keep it up, both of you."

"You're enough to drive anyone mad," said Lucy, and gave it up.  But
the Monopods seemed perfectly contented, and she decided that on the
whole the conversation had been a success.

And before everyone went to bed that evening something else happened
which made them even more satisfied with their one-legged condition.
Caspian and all the Narnians went back as soon as possible to the shore
to give their news to Rhince and the others on board the _Dawn
Treader_, who were by now very anxious.  And, of course, the Monopods
went with them, bouncing like footballs and agreeing with one another
in loud voices till Eustace said, "I wish the Magician would make them
inaudible instead of invisible."  (He was soon sorry he had spoken
because then he had to explain that an inaudible thing is something you
can't hear, and though he took a lot of trouble he never felt sure that
the Monopods had really understood, and what especially annoyed him was
that they said in the end, "Eh, he can't put things the way our Chief
does.  But you'll learn, young man.  Hark to _him_.  He'll show you how
to say things.  There's a speaker for you!")  When they reached the
bay, Reepicheep had a brilliant idea.  He had his little coracle
lowered and paddled himself about in it till the Monopods were
thoroughly interested.  He then stood up in it and said, "Worthy and
intelligent Monopods, you do not need boats.  Each of you has a foot
that will do instead.  Just jump as lightly as you can on the water and
see what happens."

The Chief Monopod hung back and warned the others that they'd find the
water powerful wet, but one or two of the younger ones tried it almost
at once; and then a few others followed their example, and at last the
whole lot did the same.  It worked perfectly.  The huge single foot of
a Monopod acted as a natural raft or boat, and when Reepicheep had
taught them how to cut rude paddles for themselves, they all paddled
about the bay and round the _Dawn Treader_, looking for all the world
like a fleet of little canoes with a fat dwarf standing up in the
extreme stern of each.  And they had races, and bottles of wine were
lowered down to them from the ship as prizes, and the sailors stood
leaning over the ship's sides and laughed till their own sides ached.

The Duffers were also very pleased with their new name of Monopods,
which seemed to them a magnificent name though they never got it right.
"That's what we are," they bellowed, "Moneypuds, Pomonods, Poddymons.
Just what it was on the tips of our tongue to call ourselves."  But
they soon got it mixed up with their old name of Duffers and finally
settled down to calling themselves the Dufflepuds; and that is what
they will probably be called for centuries.

That evening all the Narnians dined upstairs with the Magician, and
Lucy noticed how different the whole top floor looked now that she was
no longer afraid of it.  The mysterious signs on the doors were still
mysterious but now looked as if they had kind and cheerful meanings and
even the bearded mirror now seemed funny rather than frightening.  At
dinner everyone had by magic what everyone liked best to eat and drink.
And after dinner the Magician did a very useful and beautiful piece of
magic.  He laid two blank sheets of parchment on the table and asked
Drinian to give him an exact account of their voyage up to date: and as
Drinian spoke, everything he described came out on the parchment in
fine clear lines till at last each sheet was a splendid map of the
Eastern Ocean, showing Galma, Terebinthia, the Seven Isles, the Lone
Islands, Dragon Island, Burnt Island, Deathwater, and the land of the
Duffers itself, all exactly the right sizes and in the right positions.
They were the first maps ever made of those seas and better than any
that have been made since without Magic.  For on these, though the
towns and mountains looked at first just as they would on an ordinary
map, yet when the Magician lent them a magnifying glass you saw that
they were perfect little pictures of the real things, so that you could
see the very castle and slave market and streets in Narrowhaven, all
very clear though very distant, like things seen through the wrong end
of a telescope.  The only drawback was that the coastline of most of
the islands was incomplete, for the map showed only what Drinian had
seen with his own eyes.  When they were finished the Magician kept one
himself and presented the other to Caspian: it still hangs in his
Chamber of Instruments at Cair Paravel.  But the Magician could tell
them nothing about seas or lands further east.  He did, however, tell
them that about seven years before a Narnian ship had put in at his
waters and that she had on board the lords Revilian, Argoz, Mavramorn
and Rhoop: so they judged that the golden man they had seen lying in
Deathwater must be the Lord Restimar.

Next day the Magician magically mended the stern of the _Dawn Treader_
where it had been damaged by the sea serpent and loaded her with useful
gifts.  There was a most friendly parting, and when she sailed, two
hours after noon, all the Dufflepuds paddled out with her to the
harbour mouth, and cheered until she was out of sound of their cheering.




_Chapter XII_

THE DARK ISLAND

After this adventure they sailed on south and a little east for twelve
days with a gentle wind, the skies being mostly clear and the air warm,
and saw no bird or fish, except that once there were whales spouting a
long way to starboard.  Lucy and Reepicheep played a good deal of chess
at this time.  Then on the thirteenth day Edmund, from the
fighting-top, sighted what looked like a great dark mountain rising out
of the sea on their port bow.

They altered course and made for this land, mostly by oar, for the wind
would not serve them to sail north-east.  When evening fell they were
still a long way from it and rowed all night.  Next morning the weather
was fair but a flat calm.  The dark mass lay ahead, much nearer and
larger, but still very dim, so that some thought it was still a long
way off and others thought they were running into a mist.

About nine that morning, very suddenly, it was so close that they could
see that it was not land at all, nor even, in an ordinary sense, a
mist.  It was a Darkness.  It is rather hard to describe, but you will
see what it was like if you imagine yourself looking into the mouth of
a railway tunnel--a tunnel either so long or so twisty that you cannot
see the light at the far end.  And you know what it would be like.  For
a few feet you would see the rails and sleepers and gravel in broad
daylight; then there would come a place where they were in twilight;
and then, pretty suddenly, but of course without a sharp dividing line,
they would vanish altogether into smooth, solid blackness.  It was just
so here.  For a few feet in front of their bows they could see the
swell of the bright greenish-blue water.  Beyond that, they could see
the water looking pale and grey as it would look late in the evening.
But beyond that again, utter blackness as if they had come to the edge
of moonless and starless night.

Caspian shouted to the boatswain to keep her back, and all except the
rowers rushed forward and gazed from the bows.  But there was nothing
to be seen by gazing.  Behind them was the sea and the sun, before them
the Darkness.

"Do we go into this?" asked Caspian at length.

"Not by my advice," said Drinian.

"The Captain's right," said several sailors.

"I almost think he is," said Edmund.

Lucy and Eustace didn't speak but they felt very glad inside at the
turn things seemed to be taking.  But all at once the clear voice of
Reepicheep broke in upon the silence.

"And why not?" he said.  "Will someone explain to me why not."

No one was anxious to explain, so Reepicheep continued:

"If I were addressing peasants or slaves," he said, "I might suppose
that this suggestion proceeded from cowardice.  But I hope it will
never be told in Narnia that a company of noble and royal persons in
the flower of their age turned tail because they were afraid of the
dark."

"But what manner of use would it be ploughing through that blackness?"
asked Drinian.

"Use?" replied Reepicheep.  "Use, Captain?  If by use you mean filling
our bellies or our purses, I confess it will be no use at all.  So far
as I know we did not set sail to look for things useful but to seek
honour and adventures.  And here is as great an adventure as ever I
heard of, and here, if we turn back, no little impeachment of all our
honours."

Several of the sailors said things under their breath that sounded like
"Honour be blowed", but Caspian said:

"Oh, _bother_ you, Reepicheep.  I almost wish we'd left you at home.
All right!  If you put it that way, I suppose we shall have to go on.
Unless Lucy would rather not?"

Lucy felt that she would very much rather not, but what she said out
loud was, "I'm game."

"Your Majesty will at least order lights?" said Drinian.

"By all means," said Caspian.  "See to it, Captain."

So the three lanterns, at the stern, and the prow and the masthead,
were all lit, and Drinian ordered two torches amidships.  Pale and
feeble they looked in the sunshine.  Then all the men except some who
were left below at the oars were ordered on deck and fully armed and
posted in their battle stations with swords drawn.  Lucy and two
archers were posted on the fighting-top with bows bent and arrows on
the string.  Rynelf was in the bows with his line ready to take
soundings.  Reepicheep, Edmund, Eustace and Caspian, glittering in
mail, were with him.  Drinian took the tiller.

"And now, in Aslan's name, forward," cried Caspian.  "A slow, steady
stroke.  And let every man be silent and keep his ears open for orders."

With a creak and a groan the _Dawn Treader_ started to creep forward as
the men began to row.  Lucy, up in the fighting-top, had a wonderful
view of the exact moment at which they entered the darkness.  The bows
had already disappeared before the sunlight had left the stern.  She
saw it go.  At one minute the gilded stern, the blue sea, and the sky,
were all in broad daylight: next minute the sea and sky had vanished,
the stern lantern--which had been hardly noticeable before--was the
only thing to show where the ship ended.  In front of the lantern she
could see the black shape of Drinian crouching at the tiller.  Down
below her the two torches made visible two small patches of deck and
gleamed on swords and helmets, and forward there was another island of
light on the forecastle.  Apart from that the fighting-top, lit by the
masthead light which was only just above her, seemed to be a little
lighted world of its own floating in lonely darkness.  And the lights
themselves, as always happens with lights when you have to have them at
the wrong time of day, looked lurid and unnatural.  She also noticed
that she was very cold.

How long this voyage into the darkness lasted, nobody knew.  Except for
the creak of the rowlocks and the splash of the oars there was nothing
to show that they were moving at all.  Edmund, peering from the bows,
could see nothing except the reflection of the lantern in the water
before him.  It looked a greasy sort of reflection, and the ripple made
by their advancing prow appeared to be heavy, small, and lifeless.  As
time went on everyone except the rowers began to shiver with cold.

Suddenly, from somewhere--no one's sense of direction was very clear by
now--there came a cry, either of some inhuman voice or else a voice of
one in such extremity of terror that he had almost lost his humanity.

Caspian was still trying to speak--his mouth was too dry--when the
shrill voice of Reepicheep, which sounded louder than usual in that
silence, was heard.

"Who calls?" it piped.  "If you are a foe we do not fear you, and if
you are a friend your enemies shall be taught the fear of us."

"Mercy!" cried the voice.  "Mercy!  Even if you are only one more
dream, have mercy.  Take me on board.  Take me, even if you strike me
dead.  But in the name of all mercies do not fade away and leave me in
this horrible land."

"Where are you?" shouted Caspian.  "Come aboard and welcome."

There came another cry, whether of joy or terror, and then they knew
that someone was swimming towards them.

"Stand by to heave him up, men," said Caspian.

"Aye aye, your Majesty," said the sailors.  Several crowded to the port
bulwark with ropes and one, leaning far out over the side, held the
torch.  A wild, white face appeared in the blackness of the water, and
then, after some scrambling and pulling, a dozen friendly hands had
heaved the stranger on board.

Edmund thought he had never seen a wilder looking man.  Though he did
not otherwise look very old, his hair was an untidy mop of white, his
face was thin and drawn, and, for clothing, only a few wet rags hung
about him.  But what one mainly noticed were his eyes, which were so
widely opened that he seemed to have no eyelids at all, and stared as
if in an agony of pure fear.  The moment his feet reached the deck he
said:

"Fly!  Fly!  About with your ship and fly!  Row, row, row for your
lives away from this accursed shore."

"Compose yourself," said Reepicheep, "and tell us what the danger is.
We are not used to flying."

The stranger started horribly at the voice of the Mouse, which he had
not noticed before.

"Nevertheless you will fly from here," he gasped.  "This is the Island
where Dreams come true."

"That's the island I've been looking for this long time," said one of
the sailors.  "I reckoned I'd find I was married to Nancy if we landed
here."

"And I'd find Tom alive again," said another.

"Fools!" said the man, stamping his foot with rage.  "That is the sort
of talk that brought me here, and I'd better have been drowned or never
born.  Do you hear what I say?  This is where dreams--dreams, do you
understand--come to life, come real.  Not daydreams: dreams."

There was about half a minute's silence and then, with a great clatter
of armour, the whole crew were tumbling down the main hatch as quick as
they could and flinging themselves on the oars to row as they had never
rowed before; and Drinian was swinging round the tiller, and the
boatswain was giving out the quickest stroke that had ever been heard
at sea.  For it had taken everyone just that half-minute to remember
certain dreams they had had--dreams that make you afraid of going to
sleep again--and to realise what it would mean to land on a country
where dreams come true.

Only Reepicheep remained unmoved.

"Your Majesty, your Majesty," he said, "are you going to tolerate this
mutiny, this poltroonery?  This is a panic, this is a rout."

"Row, row," bellowed Caspian.  "Pull for all our lives.  Is her head
right, Drinian?  You can say what you like, Reepicheep.  There are some
things no man can face."

"It is, then, my good fortune not to be a man," replied Reepicheep with
a very stiff bow.

Lucy from up aloft had heard it all.  In an instant that one of her own
dreams which she had tried hardest to forget came back to her as
vividly as if she had only just woken from it.  So that was what was
behind them, on the island, in the darkness!  For a second she wanted
to go down to the deck and be with Edmund and Caspian.  But what was
the use?  If dreams began coming true, Edmund and Caspian themselves
might turn into something horrible just as she reached them.  She
gripped the rail of the fighting-top and tried to steady herself.  They
were rowing back to the light as hard as they could: it would be all
right in a few seconds.  But oh, if only it could be all right now!

Though the rowing made a good deal of noise it did not quite conceal
the total silence which surrounded the ship.  Everyone knew it would be
better not to listen, not to strain his ears for any sound from the
darkness.  But no one could help listening.  And soon everyone was
hearing things.  Each one heard something different.

"Do you hear a noise like ... like a huge pair of scissors opening and
shutting ... over there?" Eustace asked Rynelf.

"Hush!" said Rynelf.  "I can hear _them_ crawling up the sides of the
ship."

"_It's_ just going to settle on the mast," said Caspian.

"Ugh!" said a sailor.  "There are the gongs beginning.  I knew they
would."

Caspian, trying not to look at anything (especially not to keep looking
behind him), went aft to Drinian.

"Drinian," he said in a very low voice.  "How long did we take rowing
in--I mean rowing to where we picked up the stranger."

"Five minutes, perhaps," whispered Drinian.  "Why?"

"Because we've been more than that already trying to get out."

Drinian's hand shook on the tiller and a line of cold sweat ran down
his face.  The same idea was occurring to everyone on board.  "We shall
never get out, never get out," moaned the rowers.  "He's steering us
wrong.  We're going round and round in circles.  We shall never get
out."  The stranger, who had been lying in a huddled heap on the deck,
sat up and burst out into a horrible screaming laugh.

"Never get out!" he yelled.  "That's it.  Of course.  We shall never
get out.  What a fool I was to have thought they would let me go as
easily as that.  No, no, we shall never get out."

Lucy leant her head on the edge of the fighting-top and whispered,
"Aslan, Aslan, if ever you loved us at all, send us help now."  The
darkness did not grow any less, but she began to feel a little--a very,
very little--better.  "After all, nothing has really happened to us
yet," she thought.

"Look!" cried Rynelf's voice hoarsely from the bows.  There was a tiny
speck of light ahead, and while they watched a broad beam of light fell
from it upon the ship.  It did not alter the surrounding darkness, but
the whole ship was lit up as if by a searchlight.  Caspian blinked,
stared round, saw the faces of his companions all with wild, fixed
expressions.  Everyone was staring in the same direction: behind
everyone lay his black, sharply-edged shadow.

Lucy looked along the beam and presently saw something in it.  At first
it looked like a cross, then it looked like an aeroplane, then it
looked like a kite, and at last with a whirring of wings it was right
overhead and was an albatross.  It circled three times round the mast
and then perched for an instant on the crest of the gilded dragon at
the prow.  It called out in a strong sweet voice what seemed to be
words though no one understood them.  After that it spread its wings,
rose, and began to fly slowly ahead, bearing a little to starboard.
Drinian steered after it not doubting that it offered good guidance.
But no one except Lucy knew that as it circled the mast it had
whispered to her, "Courage, dear heart", and the voice, she felt sure,
was Aslan's, and with the voice a delicious smell breathed in her face.

In a few moments the darkness turned into a greyness ahead, and then,
almost before they dared to begin hoping, they had shot out into the
sunlight and were in the warm, blue world again.  And all at once
everybody realised that there was nothing to be afraid of and never had
been.  They blinked their eyes and looked about them.  The brightness
of the ship herself astonished them: they had half expected to find
that the darkness would cling to the white and the green and the gold
in the form of some grime or scum.  And then first one, and then
another, began laughing.

"I reckon we've made pretty good fools of ourselves," said Rynelf.

Lucy lost no time in coming down to the deck, where she found the
others all gathered round the newcomer.  For a long time he was too
happy to speak, and could only gaze at the sea and the sun and feel the
bulwarks and the ropes, as if to make sure he was really awake, while
tears rolled down his cheeks.

"Thank you," he said at last.  "You have saved me from ... but I won't
talk of that.  And now let me know who you are.  I am a Telmarine of
Narnia, and when I was worth anything men called me the Lord Rhoop."

"And I," said Caspian, "am Caspian, King of Narnia, and I sail to find
you and your companions who were my father's friends."

Lord Rhoop fell on his knees and kissed the King's hand.  "Sire," he
said, "you are the man in all the world I most wished to see.  Grant me
a boon."

"What is it?" asked Caspian.

"Never to bring me back there," he said.  He pointed astern.  They all
looked.  But they saw only bright blue sea and bright blue sky.  The
Dark Island and the darkness had vanished for ever.

"Why!" cried Lord Rhoop.  "You have destroyed it!"

"I don't think it was us," said Lucy.

"Sire," said Drinian, "this wind is fair for the south-east.  Shall I
have our poor fellows up and set sail?  And after that, every man who
can be spared, to his hammock."

"Yes," said Caspian, "and let there be grog all round.  Heigh-ho, I
feel I could sleep the clock round myself."

So all afternoon with great joy they sailed south-east with a fair
wind.  But nobody noticed when the albatross had disappeared.




_Chapter XIII_

THE THREE SLEEPERS

The wind never failed but it grew gentler every day till at length the
waves were little more than ripples, and the ship glided on hour after
hour almost as if they were sailing on a lake.  And every night they
saw that there rose in the east new constellations which no one had
ever seen in Narnia and perhaps, as Lucy thought with a mixture of joy
and fear, no living eye had seen at all.  Those new stars were big and
bright and the nights were warm.  Most of them slept on deck and talked
far into the night or hung over the ship's side watching the luminous
dance of the foam thrown up by their bows.

On an evening of startling beauty, when the sunset behind them was so
crimson and purple and widely spread that the very sky itself seemed to
have grown larger, they came in sight of land on their starboard bow.
It came slowly nearer and the light behind them made it look as if the
capes and headlands of this new country were all on fire.  But
presently they were sailing along its coast and its western cape now
rose up astern of them, black against the red sky and sharp as if it
was cut out of cardboard, and then they could see better what this
country was like.  It had no mountains but many gentle hills with
slopes like pillows.  An attractive smell came from it--what Lucy
called "a dim, purple kind of smell", which Edmund said (and Rhince
thought) was rot, but Caspian said, "I know what you mean."

They sailed on a good way, past point after point, hoping to find a
nice deep harbour, but had to content themselves in the end with a wide
and shallow bay.  Though it had seemed calm out at sea there was of
course surf breaking on the sand and they could not bring the _Dawn
Treader_ as far in as they would have liked.  They dropped anchor a
good way from the beach and had a wet and tumbling landing in the boat.
The Lord Rhoop remained on board the _Dawn Treader_.  He wished to see
no more islands.  All the time that they remained in this country the
sound of the long breakers was in their ears.

Two men were left to guard the boat and Caspian led the others inland,
but not far because it was too late for exploring and the light would
soon go.  But there was no need to go far to find an adventure.  The
level valley which lay at the head of the bay showed no road or track
or other sign of habitation.  Underfoot was fine springy turf dotted
here and there with a low bushy growth which Edmund and Lucy took for
heather.  Eustace, who was really rather good at botany, said it
wasn't, and he was probably right; but it was something of very much
the same kind.

When they had gone less than a bowshot from the shore, Drinian said,
"Look!  What's that?" and everyone stopped.

"Are they great trees?" said Caspian.

"Towers, I think," said Eustace.

"It might be giants," said Edmund in a lower voice.

"The way to find out is to go right in among them," said Reepicheep,
drawing his sword and pattering off ahead of everyone else.

"I think it's a ruin," said Lucy when they had got a good deal nearer,
and her guess was the best so far.  What they now saw was a wide oblong
space flagged with smooth stones and surrounded by grey pillars but
unroofed.  And from end to end of it ran a long table laid with a rich
crimson cloth that came down nearly to the pavement.  At either side of
it were many chairs of stone richly carved and with silken cushions
upon the seats.  But on the table itself there was set out such a
banquet as had never been seen, not even when Peter the High King kept
his court at Cair Paravel.  There were turkeys and geese and peacocks,
there were boars' heads and sides of venison, there were pies shaped
like ships under full sail or like dragons and elephants, there were
ice puddings and bright lobsters and gleaming salmon, there were nuts
and grapes, pineapples and peaches, pomegranates and melons and
tomatoes.  There were flagons of gold and silver and curiously wrought
glass; and the smell of the fruit and the wine blew towards them like a
promise of all happiness.

"I _say_," said Lucy.

They came nearer and nearer, all very quietly.

"But where are the guests?" asked Eustace.

"We can provide that, Sir," said Rhince.

"Look!" said Edmund sharply.  They were actually within the pillars now
and standing on the pavement.  Everyone looked where Edmund had
pointed.  The chairs were not all empty.  At the head of the table and
in the two places beside it there was something--or possibly three
somethings.

"What are _those_?" asked Lucy in a whisper.  "It looks like three
beavers sitting on the table."

"Or a huge bird's nest," said Edmund.

"It looks more like a haystack to me," said Caspian.

Reepicheep ran forward, jumped on a chair and thence on to the table,
and ran along it, threading his way as nimbly as a dancer between
jewelled cups and pyramids of fruit and ivory salt-cellars.  He ran
right up to the mysterious grey mass at the end: peered, touched, and
then called out:

"These will not fight, I think."

Everyone now came close and saw that what sat in those three chairs was
three men, though hard to recognise as men till you looked closely.
Their hair, which was grey, had grown over their eyes till it almost
concealed their faces, and their beards had grown over the table,
climbing round and entwining plates and goblets as brambles entwine a
fence, until, all mixed in one great mat of hair, they flowed over the
edge and down to the floor.  And from their heads the hair hung over
the backs of their chairs so that they were wholly hidden.  In fact the
three men were nearly all hair.

"Dead?" said Caspian.

"I think not, Sire," said Reepicheep, lifting one of their hands out of
its tangle of hair in his two paws.  "This one is warm and his pulse
beats."

"This one, too, and this," said Drinian.

"Why, they're only asleep," said Eustace.

"It's been a long sleep, though," said Edmund, "to let their hair grow
like this."

"It must be an enchanted sleep," said Lucy.  "I felt the moment we
landed on this island that it was full of magic.  Oh! do you think we
have perhaps come here to break it?"

"We can try," said Caspian, and began shaking the nearest of the three
sleepers.  For a moment everyone thought he was going to be successful,
for the man breathed hard and muttered, "I'll go eastward no more.  Out
oars for Narnia."  But he sank back almost at once into a yet deeper
sleep than before: that is, his heavy head sagged a few inches lower
towards the table and all efforts to rouse him again were useless.
With the second it was much the same.  "Weren't born to live like
animals.  Get to the east while you've a chance--lands behind the sun,"
and sank down.  And the third only said, "Mustard, please," and slept
hard.

"_Out oars for Narnia_, eh?" said Drinian.

"Yes," said Caspian, "you are right, Drinian.  I think our quest is at
an end.  Let's look at their rings.  Yes, these are their devices.
This is the Lord Revilian.  This is the Lord Argoz: and this, the Lord
Mavramorn."

"But we can't wake them," said Lucy.  "What are we to do?"

"Begging your Majesties' pardons all," said Rhince, "but why not fall
to while you're discussing it?  We don't see a dinner like this every
day."

"Not for your life!" said Caspian.

"That's right, that's right," said several of the sailors.  "Too much
magic about here.  The sooner we're back on board the better."

"Depend upon it," said Reepicheep, "it was from eating this food that
these three lords came by a seven years' sleep."

"I wouldn't touch it to save my life," said Drinian.

"The light's going uncommon quick," said Rynelf.

"Back to ship, back to ship," muttered the men.

"I really think," said Edmund, "they're right.  We can decide what to
do with the three sleepers to-morrow.  We daren't eat the food and
there's no point in staying here for the night.  The whole place smells
of magic--and danger."

"I am entirely of King Edmund's opinion," said Reepicheep, "as far as
concerns the ship's company in general.  But I myself will sit at this
table till sunrise."

"Why on earth?" said Eustace.

"Because," said the Mouse, "this is a very great adventure, and no
danger seems to me so great as that of knowing when I get back to
Narnia that I left a mystery behind me through fear."

"I'll stay with you, Reep," said Edmund.

"And I too," said Caspian.

"And me," said Lucy.  And then Eustace volunteered also.  This was very
brave of him because never having read of such things or even heard of
them till he joined the _Dawn Treader_ made it worse for him than for
the others.

"I beseech your Majesty----" began Drinian.

"No, my Lord," said Caspian.  "Your place is with the ship, and you
have had a day's work while we five have idled."  There was a lot of
argument about this but in the end Caspian had his way.  As the crew
marched off to the shore in the gathering dusk none of the five
watchers, except perhaps Reepicheep, could avoid a cold feeling in the
stomach.

They took some time choosing their seats at the perilous table.
Probably everyone had the same reason but no one said it out loud.  For
it was really a rather nasty choice.  One could hardly bear to sit all
night next to those three terrible hairy objects which, if not dead,
were certainly not alive in the ordinary sense.  On the other hand, to
sit at the far end, so that you would see them less and less as the
night grew darker, and wouldn't know if they were moving, and perhaps
wouldn't see them at all by about two o'clock--no, it was not to be
thought of.  So they sauntered round and round the table saying, "What
about here?" and "Or perhaps a bit further on", or, "Why not on this
side?" till at last they settled down somewhere about the middle but
nearer to the sleepers than to the other end.  It was about ten by now
and almost dark.  Those strange new constellations burned in the east.
Lucy would have liked it better if they had been the Leopard and the
Ship and other old friends of the Narnian sky.

They wrapped themselves in their sea cloaks and sat still and waited.
At first there was some attempt at talk but it didn't come to much.
And they sat and sat.  And all the time they heard the waves breaking
on the beach.

After hours that seemed like ages there came a moment when they all
knew they had been dozing a moment before but were all suddenly wide
awake.  The stars were all in quite different positions from those they
had last noticed.  The sky was very black except for the faintest
possible greyness in the east.  They were cold, though thirsty, and
stiff.  And none of them spoke because now at last something was
happening.

Before them, beyond the pillars, there was the slope of a low hill.
And now a door opened in the hillside, and light appeared in the
doorway, and a figure came out, and the door shut behind it.  The
figure carried a light, and this light was really all that they could
see distinctly.  It came slowly nearer and nearer till at last it stood
right at the table opposite to them.  Now they could see that it was a
tall girl, dressed in a single long garment of clear blue which left
her arms bare.  She was bareheaded and her yellow hair hung down her
back.  And when they looked at her they thought they had never before
known what beauty meant.

The light which she had been carrying was a tall candle in a silver
candlestick which she now set upon the table.  If there had been any
wind off the sea earlier in the night it must have died down by now,
for the flame of the candle burned as straight and still as if it were
in a room with the windows shut and the curtains drawn.  Gold and
silver on the table shone in its light.

Lucy now noticed something lying lengthwise on the table which had
escaped her attention before.  It was a knife of stone, sharp as steel,
a cruel-looking, ancient-looking thing.

No one had yet spoken a word.  Then--Reepicheep first, and Caspian
next--they all rose to their feet, because they felt that she was a
great lady.

"Travellers who have come from far to Aslan's table," said the girl.
"Why do you not eat and drink?"

"Madam," said Caspian, "we feared the food because we thought it had
cast our friends into an enchanted sleep."

"They have never tasted it," she said.

"Please," said Lucy, "what happened to them?"

"Seven years ago," said the girl, "they came here in a ship whose sails
were rags and her timbers ready to fall apart.  There were a few others
with them, sailors, and when they came to this table one said, 'Here is
the good place.  Let us set sail and reef sail and row no longer but
sit down and end our days in peace!'  And the second said, 'No, let us
re-embark and sail for Narnia and the west; it may be that Miraz is
dead.'  But the third, who was a very masterful man, leaped up and
said, 'No, by heaven.  We are men and Telmarines, not brutes.  What
should we do but seek, adventure after adventure?  We have not long to
live in any event.  Let us spend what is left in seeking the unpeopled
world behind the sunrise.'  And as they quarrelled he caught up the
Knife of Stone which lies there on the table and would have fought with
his comrades.  But it is a thing not right for him to touch.  And as
his fingers closed upon the hilt, deep sleep fell upon all the three.
And till the enchantment is undone they will never wake."

"What is this Knife of Stone?" asked Eustace.

"Do none of you know it?" said the girl.

"I--I think," said Lucy, "I've seen something like it before.  It was a
knife like it that the White Witch used when she killed Aslan at the
Stone Table long ago."

"It was the same," said the girl, "and it was brought here to be kept
in honour while the world lasts."

Edmund, who had been looking more and more uncomfortable for the last
few minutes, now spoke.

"Look here," he said, "I hope I'm not a coward--about eating this food,
I mean--and I'm sure I don't mean to be rude.  But we have had a lot of
queer adventures on this voyage of ours and things aren't always what
they seem.  When I look in your face I can't help believing all you
say: but then that's just what might happen with a witch too.  How are
we to know you're a friend?"

"You can't know," said the girl.  "You can only believe--or not."

After a moment's pause Reepicheep's small voice was heard.

"Sire," he said to Caspian, "of your courtesy fill my cup with wine
from that flagon: it is too big for me to lift.  I will drink to the
lady."

Caspian obeyed and the Mouse, standing on the table, held up a golden
cup between its tiny paws and said, "Lady, I pledge you."  Then it fell
to on cold peacock, and in a short while everyone else followed its
example.  All were very hungry and the meal, if not quite what you
wanted for a very early breakfast, was excellent as a very late supper.

"Why is it called Aslan's table?" asked Lucy presently.

"It is set here by his bidding," said the girl, "for those who come so
far.  Some call this island the World's End, for though you can sail
further, this is the beginning of the end."

"But how does the food _keep_?" asked the practical Eustace.

"It is eaten, and renewed, every day," said the girl.  "This you will
see."

"And what are we to do about the Sleepers?" asked Caspian.  "In the
world from which my friends come" (here he nodded at Eustace and the
Pevensies) "they have a story of a prince or a king coming to a castle
where all the people lay in an enchanted sleep.  In that story he could
not dissolve the enchantment until he had kissed the Princess."

"But here," said the girl, "it is different.  Here he cannot kiss the
Princess till he has dissolved the enchantment."

"Then," said Caspian, "in the name of Aslan, show me how to set about
that work at once."

"My father will teach you that," said the girl.

"Your father!" said everyone.  "Who is he?  And where?"

"Look," said the girl, turning round and pointing at the door in the
hillside.  They could see it more easily now, for while they had been
talking the stars had grown fainter and great gaps of white light were
appearing in the greyness of the eastern sky.




_Chapter XIV_

THE BEGINNING OF THE END OF THE WORLD

Slowly the door opened again and out there came a figure as tall and
straight as the girl's but not so slender.  It carried no light but
light seemed to come from it.  As it came nearer, Lucy saw that it was
like an old man.  His silver beard came down to his bare feet in front
and his silver hair hung down to his heels behind and his robe appeared
to be made from the fleece of silver sheep.  He looked so mild and
grave that once more all the travellers rose to their feet and stood in
silence.

But the old man came on without speaking to the travellers and stood on
the other side of the table opposite to his daughter.  Then both of
them held up their arms before them and turned to face the east.  In
that position they began to sing.  I wish I could write down the song,
but no one who was present could remember it.  Lucy said afterwards
that it was high, almost shrill, but very beautiful, "A cold kind of
song, an early morning kind of song."  And as they sang, the grey
clouds lifted from the eastern sky and the white patches grew bigger
and bigger till it was all white, and the sea began to shine like
silver.  And long afterwards (but those two sang all the time) the east
began to turn red and at last, unclouded, the sun came up out of the
sea and its long level ray shot down the length of the table on the
gold and silver and on the Stone Knife.

Once or twice before, the Narnians had wondered whether the sun at its
rising did not look bigger in these seas than it had looked at home.
This time they were certain.  There was no mistaking it.  And the
brightness of its ray on the dew and on the table was far beyond any
morning brightness they had ever seen.  And as Edmund said afterwards,
"Though lots of things happened on that trip which sound more exciting,
that moment was really the most exciting."  For now they knew that they
had truly come to the beginning of the End of the World.

Then something seemed to be flying at them out of the very centre of
the rising sun: but of course one couldn't look steadily in that
direction to make sure.  But presently the air became full of
voices--voices which took up the same song that the Lady and her Father
were singing, but in far wilder tones and in a language which no one
knew.  And soon after that the owners of these voices could be seen.
They were birds, large and white, and they came by hundreds and
thousands and alighted on everything; on the grass, and the pavement,
on the table, on your shoulders, your hands, and your head, till it
looked as if heavy snow had fallen.  For, like snow, they not only made
everything white but blurred and blunted all shapes.  But Lucy, looking
out from between the wings of the birds that covered her, saw one bird
fly to the Old Man with something in its beak that looked like a little
fruit, unless it was a little live coal, which it might have been, for
it was too bright to look at.  And the bird laid it in the Old Man's
mouth.

Then the birds stopped their singing and appeared to be very busy about
the table.  When they rose from it again everything on the table that
could be eaten or drunk had disappeared.  These birds rose from their
meal in their thousands and hundreds and carried away all the things
that could not be eaten or drunk, such as bones, rinds, and shells, and
took their flight back to the rising sun.  But now, because they were
not singing, the whir of their wings seemed to set the whole air
a-tremble.  And there was the table pecked clean and empty, and the
three old Lords of Narnia still fast asleep.

Now at last the Old Man turned to the travellers and bade them welcome.

"Sir," said Caspian, "will you tell us how to undo the enchantment
which holds these three Narnian Lords asleep."

"I will gladly tell you that, my son," said the Old Man.  "To break
this enchantment you must sail to the World's End, or as near as you
can come to it, and you must come back having left at least one of your
company behind."

"And what is to happen to that one?" asked Reepicheep.

"He must go on into the utter east and never return into the world."

"That is my heart's desire," said Reepicheep.

"And are we near the World's End now, Sir?" asked Caspian.  "Have you
any knowledge of the seas and lands farther east than this?"

"I saw them long ago," said the Old Man, "but it was from a great
height.  I cannot tell you such things as sailors need to know."

"Do you mean you were flying in the air?" Eustace blurted out.

"I was a long way above the air, my son," replied the Old Man.  "I am
Ramandu.  But I see that you stare at one another and have not heard
this name.  And no wonder, for the days when I was a star had ceased
long before any of you knew this world, and all the constellations have
changed."

"Golly," said Edmund under his breath.  "He's a _retired_ star."

"Aren't you a star any longer?" asked Lucy.

"I am a star at rest, my daughter," answered Ramandu.  "When I set for
the last time, decrepit and old beyond all that you can reckon, I was
carried to this island.  I am not so old now as I was then.  Every
morning a bird brings me a fire-berry from the valleys in the Sun, and
each fire-berry takes away a little of my age.  And when I have become
as young as the child that was born yesterday, then I shall take my
rising again (for we are at earth's eastern rim) and once more tread
the great dance."

"In our world," said Eustace, "a star is a huge ball of flaming gas."

"Even in your world, my son, that is not what a star is but only what
it is made of.  And in this world you have already met a star: for I
think you have been with Koriakin."

"Is he a retired star, too?" said Lucy.

"Well, not quite the same," said Ramandu.  "It was not quite as a rest
that he was set to govern the Duffers.  You might call it a punishment.
He might have shone for thousands of years more in the southern winter
sky if all had gone well."

"What did he do, Sir?" asked Caspian.

"My son," said Ramandu, "it is not for you, a son of Adam, to know what
faults a star can commit.  But come, we waste time in such talk.  Are
you yet resolved?  Will you sail farther east and come again, leaving
one to return no more, and so break the enchantment?  Or will you sail
westward?"

"Surely, Sire," said Reepicheep, "there is no question about that?  It
is very plainly part of our quest to rescue these three lords from
enchantment."

"I think the same, Reepicheep," replied Caspian.  "And even if it were
not so, it would break my heart not to go as near the World's End as
the _Dawn Treader_ will take us.  But I am thinking of the crew.  They
signed on to seek the seven lords, not to reach the rim of the Earth.
If we sail east from here we sail to find the edge, the utter east.
And no one knows how far it is.  They're brave fellows, but I see signs
that some of them are weary of the voyage and long to have our prow
pointing to Narnia again.  I don't think I should take them farther
without their knowledge and consent.  And then there's the poor Lord
Rhoop.  He's a broken man."

"My son," said the star, "it would be no use, even though you wished
it, to sail for the World's End with men unwilling or men deceived.
That is not how great unenchantments are achieved.  They must know
where they go and why.  But who is this broken man you speak of?"

Caspian told Ramandu the story of Rhoop.

"I can give him what he needs most," said Ramandu.  "In this island
there is sleep without stint or measure, and sleep in which no faintest
footfall of a dream was ever heard.  Let him sit beside these other
three and drink oblivion till your return."

"Oh, do let's do that, Caspian," said Lucy.  "I'm sure it's just what
he would love."

At that moment they were interrupted by the sound of many feet and
voices: Drinian and the rest of the ship's company were approaching.
They halted in surprise when they saw Ramandu and his daughter; and
then, because these were obviously great people, every man uncovered
his head.  Some sailors eyed the empty dishes and flagons on the table
with regret.

"My lord," said the King to Drinian, "pray send two men back to the
_Dawn Treader_ with a message to the Lord Rhoop.  Tell him that the
last of his old shipmates are here asleep--a sleep without dreams--and
that he can share it."

When this had been done, Caspian told the rest to sit down and laid the
whole situation before them.  When he had finished there was a long
silence and some whispering until presently the Master Bowman got to
his feet, and said:

"What some of us have been wanting to ask for a long time, your
Majesty, is how we're ever to get home when we do turn, whether we turn
here or somewhere else.  It's been west and north-west winds all the
way, barring an occasional calm.  And if that doesn't change, I'd like
to know what hopes we have of seeing Narnia again.  There's not much
chance of supplies lasting while we row all that way."

"That's landsman's talk," said Drinian.  "There's always a prevailing
west wind in these seas all through the late summer, and it always
changes after the new year.  We'll have plenty of wind for sailing
westward; more than we shall like from all accounts."

"That's true, Master," said an old sailor who was a Galmian by birth.
"You get some ugly weather rolling up from the east in January and
February.  And by your leave, Sir, if I was in command of this ship I'd
say to winter here and begin the voyage home in March."

"What'd you eat while you were wintering here?" asked Eustace.

"This table," said Ramandu, "will be filled with a king's feast every
day at sunset."

"Now you're talking!" said several sailors.

"Your Majesties and gentlemen and ladies all," said Rynelf, "there's
just one thing I want to say.  There's not one of us chaps as was
pressed on this journey.  We're volunteers.  And there's some here that
are looking very hard at that table and thinking about king's feasts
who were talking very loud about adventures on the day we sailed from
Cair Paravel, and swearing they wouldn't come home till we'd found the
end of the world.  And there were some standing on the quay who would
have given all they had to come with us.  It was thought a finer thing
then to have a cabin-boy's berth on the _Dawn Treader_ than to wear a
knight's belt.  I don't know if you get the hang of what I'm saying.
But what I mean is that I think chaps who set out like us will look as
silly as--as those Dufflepuds--if we come home and say we got to the
beginning of the world's end and hadn't the heart to go farther."

Some of the sailors cheered at this but some said that that was all
very well.

"This isn't going to be much fun," whispered Edmund to Caspian.  "What
are we to do if half those fellows hang back?"

"Wait," Caspian whispered back.  "I've still a card to play."

"Aren't you going to say anything, Reep?" whispered Lucy.

"No.  Why should your Majesty expect it?" answered Reepicheep in a
voice that most people heard.  "My own plans are made.  While I can, I
sail east in the _Dawn Treader_.  When she fails me, I paddle east in
my coracle.  When she sinks, I shall swim east with my four paws.  And
when I can swim no longer, if I have not reached Aslan's country, or
shot over the edge of the world in some vast cataract, I shall sink
with my nose to the sunrise and Peepiceek will be head of the talking
mice in Narnia."

"Hear, hear," said a sailor, "I'll say the same, barring the bit about
the coracle, which wouldn't bear me."  He added in a lower voice, "I'm
not going to be outdone by a mouse."

At this point Caspian jumped to his feet.  "Friends," he said, "I think
you have not quite understood our purpose.  You talk as if we had come
to you with our hat in our hand, begging for shipmates.  It isn't like
that at all.  We and our royal brother and sister and their kinsman and
Sir Reepicheep, the good knight, and the Lord Drinian have an errand to
the world's edge.  It is our pleasure to choose from among such of you
as are willing those whom we deem worthy of so high an enterprise.  We
have not said that any can come for the asking.  That is why we shall
now command the Lord Drinian and Master Rhince to consider carefully
what men among you are the hardest in battle, the most skilled seamen,
the purest in blood, the most loyal to our person, and the cleanest of
life and manners; and to give their names to us in a schedule."  He
paused and went on in a quicker voice, "Aslan's mane!" he exclaimed.
"Do you think that the privilege of seeing the last things is to be
bought for a song?  Why, every man that comes with us shall bequeath
the title of _Dawn Treader_ to all his descendants and when we land at
Cair Paravel on the homeward voyage he shall have either gold or land
enough to make him rich all his life.  Now--scatter over the island,
all of you.  In half an hour's time I shall receive the names that Lord
Drinian brings me."

There was rather a sheepish silence and then the crew made their bows
and moved away, one in this direction and one in that, but mostly in
little knots or bunches, talking.

"And now for the Lord Rhoop," said Caspian.

But turning to the head of the table he saw that Rhoop was already
there.  He had arrived, silent and unnoticed, while the discussion was
going on, and was seated beside the Lord Argoz.  The daughter of
Ramandu stood beside him as if she had just helped him into his chair;
Ramandu stood behind him and laid both his hands on Rhoop's grey head.
Even in daylight a faint silver light came from the hands of the star.
There was a smile on Rhoop's haggard face.  He held out one of his
hands to Lucy and the other to Caspian.  For a moment it looked as if
he were going to say something.  Then his smile brightened as if he
were feeling some delicious sensation, a long sigh of contentment came
from his lips, his head fell forward, and he slept.

"Poor Rhoop," said Lucy.  "I _am_ glad.  He must have had terrible
times."

"Don't let's even think of it," said Eustace.

Meanwhile Caspian's speech, helped perhaps by some magic of the island,
was having just the effect he intended.  A good many who had been
anxious enough to _get_ out of the voyage felt quite differently about
being _left_ out of it.  And of course whenever any one sailor
announced that he had made up his mind to ask for permission to sail,
the ones who hadn't said this felt that they were getting fewer and
more uncomfortable.  So that before the half-hour was nearly over
several people were positively "sucking up" to Drinian and Rhince (at
least that was what they called it at my school) to get a good report.
And soon there were only three left who didn't want to go, and those
three were trying very hard to persuade others to stay with them.  And
very shortly after that there was only one left.  And in the end he
began to be afraid of being left behind all on his own and changed his
mind.

At the end of the half-hour they all came trooping back to Aslan's
Table and stood at one end while Drinian and Rhince went and sat down
with Caspian and made their report; and Caspian accepted all the men
but that one who had changed his mind at the last moment.  His name was
Pittencream and he stayed on the Island of the Star all the time the
others were away looking for the World's End, and he very much wished
he had gone with them.  He wasn't the sort of man who could enjoy
talking to Ramandu and Ramandu's daughter (nor they to him), and it
rained a good deal, and though there was a wonderful feast on the Table
every night, he didn't very much enjoy it.  He said it gave him the
creeps sitting there alone (and in the rain as likely as not) with
those four Lords asleep at the end of the Table.  And when the others
returned he felt so out of things that he deserted on the voyage home
at the Lone Islands, and went and lived in Calormen, where he told
wonderful stories about his adventures at the End of the World, until
at last he came to believe them himself.  So you may say, in a sense,
that he lived happily ever after.  But he could never bear mice.

That night they all ate and drank together at the great Table between
the pillars where the feast was magically renewed: and next morning the
_Dawn Treader_ set sail once more just when the great birds had come
and gone again.

"Lady," said Caspian, "I hope to speak with you again when I have
broken the enchantments."  And Ramandu's daughter looked at him and
smiled.




_Chapter XV_

THE WONDERS OF THE LAST SEA

Very soon after they had left Ramandu's country they began to feel that
they had already sailed beyond the world.  All was different.  For one
thing they all found that they were needing less sleep.  One did not
want to go to bed nor to eat much, nor even to talk except in low
voices.  Another thing was the light.  There was too much of it.  The
sun when it came up each morning looked twice, if not three times, its
usual size.  And every morning (which gave Lucy the strangest feeling
of all) the huge white birds, singing their song with human voices in a
language no one knew, streamed overhead and vanished astern on their
way to their breakfast at Aslan's Table.  A little later they came
flying back and vanished into the east.

"How beautifully clear the water is!" said Lucy to herself, as she
leaned over the port side early in the afternoon of the second day.

And it was.  The first thing that she noticed was a little black
object, about the size of a shoe, travelling along at the same speed as
the ship.  For a moment she thought it was something floating on the
surface.  But then there came floating past a bit of stale bread which
the cook had just thrown out of the galley.  And the bit of bread
looked as if it were going to collide with the black thing, but it
didn't.  It passed above it, and Lucy now saw that the black thing
could not be on the surface.  Then the black thing suddenly got very
much bigger and flicked back to normal size a moment later.

Now Lucy knew she had seen something just like that happen somewhere
else--if only she could remember where.  She held her hand to her head
and screwed up her face and put out her tongue in the effort to
remember.  At last she did.  Of course!  It was like what you saw from
a train on a bright sunny day.  You saw the black shadow of your own
coach running along the fields at the same pace as the train.  Then you
went into a cutting; and immediately the same shadow flicked close up
to you and got big, racing along the grass of the cutting-bank.  Then
you came out of the cutting and--flick!--once more the black shadow had
gone back to its normal size and was running along the fields.

"It's our shadow!--the shadow of the _Dawn Treader_" said Lucy.  "Our
shadow running along on the bottom of the sea.  That time when it got
bigger it went over a hill.  But in that case the water must be clearer
than I thought!  Good gracious, I must be seeing the bottom of the sea;
fathoms and fathoms down."

As soon as she had said this she realised that the great silvery
expanse which she had been seeing (without noticing) for some time was
really the sand on the sea-bed and that all sorts of darker or brighter
patches were not lights and shadows on the surface but real things on
the bottom.  At present, for instance, they were passing over a mass of
soft purply green with a broad, winding strip of pale grey in the
middle of it.  But now that she knew it was on the bottom she saw it
much better.  She could see that bits of the dark stuff were much
higher than other bits and were waving gently.  "Just like trees in a
wind," said Lucy.  "And I do believe that's what they are.  It's a
submarine forest."

They passed on above it and presently the pale streak was joined by
another pale streak.  "If I was down there," thought Lucy, "that streak
would be just like a road through the wood.  And that place where it
joins the other would be a crossroads.  Oh, I do wish I was.  Hallo!
the forest is coming to an end.  And I do believe the streak really was
a road!  I can still see it going on across the open sand.  It's a
different colour.  And it's marked out with something at the
edges--dotted lines.  Perhaps they are stones.  And now it's getting
wider."

But it was not really getting wider, it was getting nearer.  She
realised this because of the way in which the shadow of the ship came
rushing up towards her.  And the road--she felt sure it was a road
now--began to go in zigzags.  Obviously it was climbing up a steep
hill.  And when she held her head sideways and looked back, what she
saw was very like what you see when you look down a winding road from
the top of a hill.  She could even see the shafts of sunlight falling
through the deep water on to the wooded valley; and, in the extreme
distance, everything melting away into a dim greenness.  But some
places--the sunny ones, she thought--were ultramarine blue.

She could not, however, spend much time looking back; what was coming
into view in the forward direction was too exciting.  The road had
apparently now reached the top of the hill and ran straight forward.
Little specks were moving to and fro on it.  And now something most
wonderful, fortunately in full sunlight--or as full as it can be when
it falls through fathoms of water--flashed into sight.  It was knobbly
and jagged and of a pearly, or perhaps an ivory, colour.  She was so
nearly straight above it that at first she could hardly make out what
it was.  But everything became plain when she noticed its shadow.  The
sunlight was falling across Lucy's shoulders, so the shadow of the
thing lay stretched out on the sand behind it.  And by its shape she
saw clearly that it was a shadow of towers and pinnacles, minarets and
domes.

"Why!--it's a city or a huge castle," said Lucy to herself.  "But I
wonder why they've built it on top of a high mountain?"

Long afterwards when she was back in England and talked all these
adventures over with Edmund, they thought of a reason and I am pretty
sure it is the true one.  In the sea, the deeper you go, the darker and
colder it gets, and it is down there, in the dark and cold, that
dangerous things live--the squid and the Sea Serpent and the Kraken.
The valleys are the wild, unfriendly places.  The sea-people feel about
their valleys as we do about mountains, and feel about their mountains
as we feel about valleys.  It is on the heights (or, as we would say,
"in the shallows") that there is warmth and peace.  The reckless
hunters and brave knights of the sea go down into the depths on quests
and adventures, but return home to the heights for rest and peace,
courtesy and council, the sports, the dances and the songs.

They had passed the city and the sea-bed was still rising.  It was only
a few hundred feet below the ship now.  The road had disappeared.  They
were sailing above an open park-like country, dotted with little groves
of brightly coloured vegetation.  And then--Lucy nearly squealed aloud
with excitement--she had seen People.

There were between fifteen and twenty of them, and all mounted on
sea-horses--not the tiny little sea-horses which you may have seen in
museums but horses rather bigger than themselves.  They must be noble
and lordly people, Lucy thought, for she could catch the gleam of gold
on some of their foreheads and streamers of emerald or orange coloured
stuff fluttered from their shoulders in the current.  Then:

"Oh, bother these fish!" said Lucy, for a whole shoal of small fat
fish, swimming quite close to the surface, had come between her and the
Sea People.  But though this spoiled her view it led to the most
interesting thing of all.  Suddenly a fierce little fish of a kind she
had never seen before came darting up from below, snapped, grabbed, and
sank rapidly with one of the fat fish in its mouth.  And all the Sea
People were sitting on their horses staring up at what had happened.
They seemed to be talking and laughing.  And before the hunting fish
had got back to them with its prey, another of the same kind came up
from the Sea People.  And Lucy was almost certain that one big Sea Man
who sat on his sea-horse in the middle of the party had sent it or
released it; as if he had been holding it back till then in his hand or
on his wrist.

"Why, I do declare," said Lucy, "it's a hunting party.  Or more like a
hawking party.  Yes, that's it.  They ride out with these little fierce
fish on their wrists just as we used to ride out with falcons on our
wrists when we were Kings and Queens at Cair Paravel long ago.  And
then they fly them--or I suppose I should say _swim_ them--at the
others.  How----"

She stopped suddenly because the scene was changing.  The Sea People
had noticed the _Dawn Treader_.  The shoal of fish had scattered in
every direction: the People themselves were coming up to find out the
meaning of this big, black thing which had come between them and the
sun.  And now they were so close to the surface that if they had been
in air, instead of water, Lucy could have spoken to them.  There were
men and women both.  All wore coronets of some kind and many had chains
of pearls.  They wore no other clothes.  Their bodies were the colour
of old ivory, their hair dark purple.  The King in the centre (no one
could mistake him for anything but the king) looked proudly and
fiercely into Lucy's face and shook a spear in his hand.  His knights
did the same.  The faces of the ladies were filled with astonishment.
Lucy felt sure they had never seen a ship or a human before--and how
should they, in seas beyond the world's end where no ship ever came?

"What are you staring at, Lu?" said a voice close beside her.

Lucy had been so absorbed in what she was seeing that she started at
the sound, and when she turned she found that her arm had gone "dead"
from leaning so long on the rail in one position.  Drinian and Edmund
were beside her.

"Look," she said.

They both looked, but almost at once Drinian said in a low voice:

"Turn round at once, your Majesties--that's right, with our backs to
the sea.  And don't look as if we were talking about anything
important."

"Why, what's the matter?" said Lucy as she obeyed.

"It'll never do for the sailors to see _all that_," said Drinian.
"We'll have men falling in love with a sea-woman, or falling in love
with the under-sea country itself, and jumping overboard.  I've heard
of that kind of thing happening before in strange seas.  It's always
unlucky to see _these_ people."

"But we used to know them," said Lucy.  "In the old days at Cair
Paravel when my brother Peter was High King.  They came to the surface
and sang at our coronation."

"I think that must have been a different kind, Lu," said Edmund.  "They
could live in the air as well as under water.  I rather think these
can't.  By the look of them they'd have surfaced and started attacking
us long ago if they could.  They seem very fierce."

"At any rate," began Drinian, but at that moment two sounds were heard.
One was a plop.  The other was a voice from the fighting-top shouting,
"Man overboard!" Then everyone was busy.  Some of the sailors hurried
aloft to take in the sail: others hurried below to get to the oars; and
Rhince, who was on duty on the poop, began to put the helm hard over so
as to come round and back to the man who had gone overboard.  But by
now everyone knew that it wasn't strictly a man.  It was Reepicheep.

"Drat that mouse!" said Drinian.  "It's more trouble than all the rest
of the ship's company put together.  If there is any scrape to be got
into, in it will get!  It ought to be put in
irons--keel-hauled--marooned--have its whiskers cut off.  Can any one
see the little blighter?"

All this didn't mean that Drinian really disliked Reepicheep.  On the
contrary he liked him very much and was therefore frightened about him,
and being frightened put him in a bad temper--just as your mother is
much angrier with you for running out into the road in front of a car
than a stranger would be.  No one, of course, was afraid of
Reepicheep's drowning, for he was an excellent swimmer; but the three
who knew what was going on below the water were afraid of those long,
cruel spears in the hands of the Sea People.

In a few minutes the _Dawn Treader_ had come round and every one could
see the black blob in the water which was Reepicheep.  He was
chattering with the greatest excitement but as his mouth kept on
getting filled with water nobody could understand what he was saying.

"He'll blurt the whole thing out if we don't shut him up," cried
Drinian.  To prevent this he rushed to the side and lowered a rope
himself, shouting to the sailors, "All right, all right.  Back to your
places.  I hope I can heave a mouse up without help."  And as
Reepicheep began climbing up the rope--not very nimbly because his wet
fur made him heavy--Drinian leaned over and whispered to him,

"Don't tell.  Not a word."

But when the dripping Mouse had reached the deck it turned out not to
be at all interested in the Sea People.

"Sweet!" he cheeped.  "Sweet, sweet!"

"What are you talking about?" asked Drinian crossly.  "And you needn't
shake yourself all over _me_, either."

"I tell you the water's sweet," said the Mouse.  "Sweet, fresh.  It
isn't salt."

For a moment no one quite took in the importance of this.  But then
Reepicheep once more repeated the old prophecy:

  "Where the waves grow sweet,
  Doubt not, Reepicheep,
  There is the utter East."

Then at last everyone understood.

"Let me have a bucket, Rynelf," said Drinian.

It was handed him and he lowered it and up it came again.  The water
shone in it like glass.

"Perhaps your Majesty would like to taste it first," said Drinian to
Caspian.

The King took the bucket in both hands, raised it to his lips, sipped,
then drank deeply and raised his head.  His face was changed.  Not only
his eyes but everything about him seemed to be brighter.

"Yes," he said, "it is sweet.  That's real water, that.  I'm not sure
that it isn't going to kill me.  But it is the death I would have
chosen--if I'd known about it till now."

"What do you mean?" asked Edmund.

"It--it's like light more than anything else," said Caspian.

"That is what it is," said Reepicheep.  "Drinkable light.  We must be
very near the end of the world now."

There was a moment's silence and then Lucy knelt down on the deck and
drank from the bucket.

"It's the loveliest thing I have ever tasted," she said with a kind of
gasp.  "But oh--it's strong.  We shan't need to eat anything now."

And one by one everybody on board drank.  And for a long time they were
all silent.  They felt almost too well and strong to bear it; and
presently they began to notice another result.  As I have said before,
there had been too much light ever since they left the island of
Ramandu--the sun too large (though not too hot), the sea too bright,
the air too shining.  Now, the light grew no less--if anything, it
increased--but they could bear it.  They could look straight up at the
sun without blinking.  They could see more light than they had ever
seen before.  And the deck and the sail and their own faces and bodies
became brighter and brighter and every rope shone.  And next morning,
when the sun rose, now five or six times its old size, they stared hard
into it and could see the very feathers of the birds that came flying
from it.

Hardly a word was spoken on board all that day, till about dinner-time
(no one wanted any dinner, the water was enough for them) Drinian said:

"I can't understand this.  There is not a breath of wind.  The sail
hangs dead.  The sea is as flat as a pond.  And yet we drive on as fast
as if there were a gale behind us."

"I've been thinking that, too," said Caspian.  "We must be caught in
some strong current."

"H'm," said Edmund.  "That's not so nice if the World really has an
edge and we're getting near it."

"You mean," said Caspian, "that we might be just--well, poured over it?"

"Yes, yes," cried Reepicheep, clapping his paws together.  "That's how
I've always imagined it--the World like a great round table and the
waters of all the oceans endlessly pouring over the edge.  The ship
will tip up--stand on her head--for one moment we shall see over the
edge--and then, down, down, the rush, the speed----"

"And what do you think will be waiting for us at the bottom, eh?" said
Drinian.

"Aslan's country perhaps," said the Mouse, its eyes shining.  "Or
perhaps there isn't any bottom.  Perhaps it goes down for ever and
ever.  But whatever it is, won't it be worth anything just to have
looked for one moment beyond the edge of the world."

"But look here," said Eustace, "this is all rot.  The world's round--I
mean, round like a ball, not like a table."

"Our world is," said Edmund.  "But is this?"

"Do you mean to say," asked Caspian, "that you three come from a round
world (round like a ball) and you've never told me!  It's really too
bad of you.  Because we have fairy-tales in which there are round
worlds and I always loved them.  I never believed there were any real
ones.  But I've always wished there were and I've always longed to live
in one.  Oh, I'd give anything--I wonder why you can get into our world
and we never get into yours?  If only I had the chance!  It must be
exciting to live on a thing like a ball.  Have you ever been to the
parts where people walk about upside-down?"

Edmund shook his head.  "And it isn't like that," he added.  "There's
nothing particularly exciting about a round world when you're there."




_Chapter XVI_

THE VERY END OF THE WORLD

Reepicheep was the only person on board besides Drinian and the two
Pevensies who had noticed the Sea People.  He had dived in at once when
he saw the Sea King shaking his spear, for he regarded this as a sort
of threat or challenge and wanted to have the matter out there and
then.  The excitement of discovering that the water was now fresh had
distracted his attention, and before he remembered the Sea People again
Lucy and Drinian had taken him aside and warned him not to mention what
he had seen.

As things turned out they need hardly have bothered, for by this time
the _Dawn Treader_ was gliding over a part of the sea which seemed to
be uninhabited.  No one except Lucy saw anything more of the People and
even she had only one short glimpse.  All morning on the following day
they sailed in fairly shallow water and the bottom was weedy.  Just
before midday Lucy saw a large shoal of fishes grazing on the weed.
They were all eating steadily and all moving in the same direction.
"Just like a flock of sheep," thought Lucy.  Suddenly she saw a little
Sea Girl of about her own age in the middle of them--a quiet,
lonely-looking girl with a sort of crook in her hand.  Lucy felt sure
that this girl must be a shepherdess--or perhaps a fish-herdess--and
that the shoal was really a flock at pasture.  Both the fishes and the
girl were quite close to the surface.  And just as the girl, gliding in
the shallow water, and Lucy, leaning over the bulwark, came opposite to
one another, the girl looked up and stared straight into Lucy's face.
Neither could speak to the other and in a moment the Sea Girl dropped
astern.  But Lucy will never forget her face.  It did not look
frightened or angry like those of the other Sea People.  Lucy had liked
that girl and she felt certain the girl had liked her.  In that one
moment they had somehow become friends.  There does not seem to be much
chance of their meeting again in that world or any other.  But if ever
they do they will rush together with their hands held out.

After that for many days, without wind in her shrouds or foam at her
bows, across a waveless sea, the _Dawn Treader_ glided smoothly east.
Every day and every hour the light became more brilliant and still they
could bear it.  No one ate or slept and no one wanted to, but they drew
buckets of dazzling water from the sea, stronger than wine and somehow
wetter, more liquid, than ordinary water, and pledged one another
silently in deep draughts of it.  And one or two of the sailors who had
been oldish men when the voyage began now grew younger every day.
Everyone on board was filled with joy and excitement, but not an
excitement that made one talk.  The further they sailed the less they
spoke, and then almost in a whisper.  The stillness of that last sea
laid hold on them.

"My Lord," said Caspian to Drinian one day, "what do you see ahead?"

"Sire," said Drinian, "I see whiteness.  All along the horizon from
north to south, as far as my eyes can reach."

"That is what I see too," said Caspian, "and I cannot imagine what it
is."

"If we were in higher latitudes, your Majesty," said Drinian, "I would
say it was ice.  But it can't be that; not here.  All the same, we'd
better get men to the oars and hold the ship back against the current.
Whatever the stuff is, we don't want to crash into it at this speed!"

They did as Drinian said, and so continued to go slower and slower.
The whiteness did not get any less mysterious as they approached it.
If it was land it must be a very strange land, for it seemed just as
smooth as the water and on the same level with it.  When they got very
close to it Drinian put the helm hard over and turned the _Dawn
Treader_ south so that she was broadside on to the current and rowed a
little way southward along the edge of the whiteness.  In so doing they
accidentally made the important discovery that the current was only
about forty feet wide and the rest of the sea as still as a pond.  This
was good news for the crew, who had already begun to think that the
return journey to Ramandu's land, rowing against stream all the way,
would be pretty poor sport.  (It also explained why the shepherd girl
had dropped so quickly astern.  She was not in the current.  If she had
been she would have been moving east at the same speed as the ship.)

And still no one could make out what the white stuff was.  Then the
boat was lowered and it put off to investigate.  Those who remained on
the _Dawn Treader_ could see that the boat pushed right in amidst the
whiteness.  Then they could hear the voices of the party in the boat
(clear across the still water) talking in a shrill and surprised way.
Then there was a pause while Rynelf in the bows of the boat took a
sounding; and when, after that, the boat came rowing back there seemed
to be plenty of the white stuff inside her.  Everyone crowded to the
side to hear the news.

"Lilies, your Majesty!" shouted Rynelf, standing up in the bows.

"_What_ did you say?" asked Caspian.

"Blooming lilies, your Majesty," said Rynelf.  "Same as in a pool in a
garden at home."

"Look!" said Lucy, who was in the stern of the boat.  She held up her
wet arms full of white petals and broad flat leaves.

"What's the depth, Rynelf?" asked Drinian.

"That's the funny thing, Captain," said Rynelf.  "It's still deep.
Three and a half fathoms clear."

"They can't be real lilies--not what we call lilies," said Eustace.

Probably they were not, but they were very like them.  And when, after
some consultation, the _Dawn Treader_ turned back into the current and
began to glide eastward through the Lily Lake or the Silver Sea (they
tried both these names but it was the Silver Sea that stuck and is now
on Caspian's map) the strangest part of their travels began.  Very soon
the open sea which they were leaving was only a thin rim of blue on the
western horizon.  Whiteness, shot with faintest colour of gold, spread
round them on every side, except just astern where their passage had
thrust the lilies apart and left an open lane of water that shone like
dark green glass.  To look at, this last sea was very like the Arctic;
and if their eyes had not by now grown as strong as eagles' the sun on
all that whiteness--especially at early morning when the sun was
hugest--would have been unbearable.  And every evening the same
whiteness made the daylight last longer.  There seemed no end to the
lilies.  Day after day from all those miles and leagues of flowers
there rose a smell which Lucy found it very hard to describe;
sweet--yes, but not at all sleepy or overpowering, a fresh, wild,
lonely smell that seemed to get into your brain and make you feel that
you could go up mountains at a run or wrestle with an elephant.  She
and Caspian said to one another, "I feel that I can't stand much more
of this, yet I don't want it to stop."

They took soundings very often but it was only several days later that
the water became shallower.  After that it went on getting shallower.
There came a day when they had to row out of the current and feel their
way forward at a snail's pace, rowing.  And soon it was clear that the
_Dawn Treader_ could sail no further east.  Indeed it was only by very
clever handling that they saved her from grounding.

"Lower the boat," cried Caspian, "and then call the men aft.  I must
speak to them."

"What's he going to do?" whispered Eustace to Edmund.  "There's a queer
look in his eyes."

"I think we probably all look the same," said Edmund.

They joined Caspian on the poop and soon all the men were crowded
together at the foot of the ladder to hear the King's speech.

"Friends," said Caspian, "we have now fulfilled the quest on which you
embarked.  The seven lords are all accounted for and as Sir Reepicheep
has sworn never to return, when you reach Ramandu's Land you will
doubtless find the Lords Revilian and Argoz and Mavramorn awake.  To
you, my Lord Drinian, I entrust this ship, bidding you sail to Narnia
with all the speed you may, and above all not to land on the Island of
Deathwater.  And instruct my regent, the Dwarf Trumpkin, to give to all
these, my shipmates, the rewards I promised them.  They have been
earned well.  And if I come not again it is my will that the Regent,
and Master Cornelius, and Trufflehunter the Badger, and the Lord
Drinian choose a King of Narnia with the consent--

"But, Sire," interrupted Drinian, "are you abdicating?"

"I am going with Reepicheep to see the World's End," said Caspian.

A low murmur of dismay ran through the sailors.

"We will take the boat," said Caspian.  "You will have no need of it in
these gentle seas and you must build a new one in Ramandu's island.
And now----"

"Caspian," said Edmund suddenly and sternly, "you can't do this."

"Most certainly," said Reepicheep, "his Majesty cannot."

"No indeed," said Drinian.

"Can't?" said Caspian sharply, looking for a moment not unlike his
uncle Miraz.

"Begging your Majesty's pardon," said Rynelf from the deck below, "but
if one of us did the same it would be called deserting."

"You presume too much on your long service, Rynelf," said Caspian.

"No, Sire!  He's perfectly right," said Drinian.

"By the Mane of Aslan," said Caspian, "I had thought you were all my
subjects here, not my schoolmasters."

"I'm not," said Edmund, "and I say you can _not_ do this."

"Can't again," said Caspian.  "What do you mean?"

"If it please your Majesty, we mean _shall not_," said Reepicheep with
a very low bow.  "You are the King of Narnia.  You break faith with all
your subjects, and especially with Trumpkin, if you do not return.  You
shall not please yourself with adventures as if you were a private
person.  And if your Majesty will not hear reason it will be the truest
loyalty of every man on board to follow me in disarming and binding you
till you come to your senses."

"Quite right," said Edmund.  "Like they did with Ulysses when he wanted
to go near the Sirens."

Caspian's hand had gone to his sword hilt, when Lucy said, "And you've
almost promised Ramandu's daughter to go back."

Caspian paused.  "Well, yes.  There is that," he said.  He stood
irresolute for a moment and then shouted out to the ship in general.

"Well, have your way.  The quest is ended.  We all return.  Get the
boat up again."

"Sire," said Reepicheep, "we do not _all_ return.  I, as I explained
before----"

"Silence!" thundered Caspian.  "I've been lessoned but I'll not be
baited.  Will no one silence that Mouse?"

"Your Majesty promised," said Reepicheep, "to be good lord to the
Talking Beasts of Narnia."

"Talking beasts, yes," said Caspian.  "I said nothing about beasts that
never stop talking."  And he flung down the ladder in a temper and went
into the cabin, slamming the door.

But when the others rejoined him a little later they found him changed;
he was white and there were tears in his eyes.

"It's no good," he said.  "I might as well have behaved decently for
all the good I did with my temper and swagger.  Aslan has spoken to me.
No--I don't mean he was actually here.  He wouldn't fit into the cabin,
for one thing.  But that gold lion's head on the wall came to life and
spoke to me.  It was terrible--his eyes.  Not that he was at all rough
with me--only a bit stern at first.  But it was terrible all the same.
And he said--he said--oh, I can't bear it.  The worst thing he could
have said.  You're to go on--Reep and Edmund, and Lucy, and Eustace;
and I'm to go back.  Alone.  And at once.  And what is the good of
anything?"

"Caspian, dear," said Lucy.  "You knew we'd have to go back to our own
world sooner or later."

"Yes," said Caspian with a sob, "but this is sooner."

"You'll feel better when you get back to Ramandu's Land," said Lucy.

He cheered up a little later on, but it was a grievous parting on both
sides and I will not dwell on it.  About two o'clock in the afternoon,
well victualled and watered (though they thought they would need
neither food nor drink) and with Reepicheep's coracle on board, the
boat pulled away from the _Dawn Treader_ to row through the endless
carpet of lilies.  The _Dawn Treader_ flew all her flags and hung out
her shields to honour their departure.  Tall and big and homelike she
looked from their low position with the lilies all round them.  And
even before she was out of sight they saw her turn and begin rowing
slowly westward.  Yet though Lucy shed a few tears she could not feel
it as much as you might have expected.  The light, the silence, the
tingling smell of the Silver Sea, even (in some odd way) the loneliness
itself, were too exciting.

There was no need to row, for the current drifted them steadily to the
east.  None of them slept nor ate.  All that night and all next day
they glided eastward, and when the third day dawned--with a brightness
you or I could not bear even if we had dark glasses on--they saw a
wonder ahead.  It was as if a wall stood up between them and the sky, a
greenish-grey, trembling, shimmering wall.  Then up came the sun, and
at its first rising they saw it through the wall and it turned into
wonderful rainbow colours.  Then they knew that the wall was really a
long, tall wave--a wave endlessly fixed in one place as you may often
see at the edge of a waterfall.  It seemed to be about thirty feet
high, and the current was gliding them swiftly towards it.  You might
have supposed they would have thought of their danger.  They didn't.  I
don't think anyone could have in their position.  For now they saw
something not only behind the wave but behind the sun.  They could not
have seen even the sun if their eyes had not been strengthened by the
water of the Last Sea.  But now they could look at the rising sun and
see it clearly and see things beyond it.  What they saw--eastward,
beyond the sun--was a range of mountains.  It was so high that either
they never saw the top of it or they forgot it.  None of them remembers
seeing any sky in that direction.  And the mountains must really have
been outside the world.  For any mountains even a quarter or a
twentieth of that height ought to have had ice and snow on them.  But
these were warm and green and full of forests and waterfalls however
high you looked.  And suddenly there came a breeze from the east,
tossing the top of the wave into foamy shapes and ruffling the smooth
water all round them.  It lasted only a second or so but what it
brought them in that second none of those three children will ever
forget.  It brought both a smell and a sound, a musical sound.  Edmund
and Eustace would never talk about it afterwards.  Lucy could only say,
"It would break your heart."  "Why," said I, "was it so sad?"  "Sad!!
No," said Lucy.

No one in that boat doubted that they were seeing beyond the End of the
World into Aslan's country.

At that moment, with a crunch, the boat ran aground.  The water was too
shallow now even for it.  "This," said Reepicheep, "is where I go on
alone."

They did not even try to stop him, for everything now felt as if it had
been fated or had happened before.  They helped him to lower his little
coracle.  Then he took off his sword ("I shall need it no more," he
said) and flung it far away across the lilied sea.  Where it fell it
stood upright with the hilt above the surface.  Then he bade them
good-bye, trying to be sad for their sakes; but he was quivering with
happiness.  Lucy, for the first and last time, did what she had always
wanted to do, taking him in her arms and caressing him.  Then hastily
he got into his coracle and took his paddle, and the current caught it
and away he went, very black against the lilies.  But no lilies grew on
the wave; it was a smooth green slope.  The coracle went more and more
quickly, and beautifully it rushed up the wave's side.  For one split
second they saw its shape and Reepicheep's on the very top.  Then it
vanished, and since that moment no one can truly claim to have seen
Reepicheep the Mouse.  But my belief is that he came safe to Aslan's
country and is alive there to this day.

As the sun rose the sight of those mountains outside the world faded
away.  The wave remained but there was only blue sky behind it.

The children got out of the boat and waded--not towards the wave but
southward with the wall of water on their left.  They could not have
told you why they did this; it was their fate.  And though they had
felt--and been--very grown up on the _Dawn Treader_, they now felt just
the opposite and held hands as they waded through the lilies.  They
never felt tired.  The water was warm and all the time it got
shallower.  At last they were on dry sand, and then on grass--a huge
plain of very fine short grass, almost level with the Silver Sea and
spreading in every direction without so much as a molehill.

And of course, as it always does in a perfectly flat place without
trees, it looked as if the sky came down to meet the grass in front of
them.  But as they went on they got the strangest impression that here
at last the sky did really come down and join the earth--a blue wall,
very bright, but real and solid: more like glass than anything else.
And soon they were quite sure of it.  It was very near now.

But between them and the foot of the sky there was something so white
on the green grass that even with their eagles' eyes they could hardly
look at it.  They came on and saw that it was a Lamb.

"Come and have breakfast," said the Lamb in its sweet milky voice.

Then they noticed for the first time that there was a fire lit on the
grass and fish roasting on it.  They sat down and ate the fish, hungry
now for the first time for many days.  And it was the most delicious
food they had ever tasted.

"Please, Lamb," said Lucy, "is this the way to Aslan's country?"

"Not for you," said the Lamb.  "For you the door into Aslan's country
is from your own world."

"What!" said Edmund.  "Is there a way into Aslan's country from our
world too?"

"There is a way into my country from all the worlds," said the Lamb;
but as he spoke his snowy white flushed into tawny gold and his size
changed and he was Aslan himself, towering above them and scattering
light from his mane.

"Oh, Aslan," said Lucy.  "Will you tell us how to get into your country
from our world?"

"I shall be telling you all the time," said Aslan.  "But I will not
tell you how long or short the way will be; only that it lies across a
river.  But do not fear that, for I am the great Bridge Builder.  And
now come; I will open the door in the sky and send you to your own
land."

"Please, Aslan," said Lucy.  "Before we go, will you tell us when we
can come back to Narnia again?  Please.  And oh, do, do, do make it
soon."

"Dearest," said Aslan very gently, "you and your brother will never
come back to Narnia."

"Oh, _Aslan_!!" said Edmund and Lucy both together in despairing voices.

"You are too old, children," said Aslan, "and you must begin to come
close to your own world now."

"It isn't Narnia, you know," sobbed Lucy.  "It's OK.  We shan't meet
you there.  And how can we live, never meeting you?"

"But you shall meet me, dear one," said Aslan.

"Are--are you there too, Sir?" said Edmund.

"I am," said Aslan.  "But there I have another name.  You must learn to
know me by that name.  This was the very reason why you were brought to
Narnia, that by knowing me here for a little, you may know me better
there."

"And is Eustace never to come back here either?" said Lucy.

"Child," said Aslan, "do you really need to know that?  Come, I am
opening the door in the sky."  Then all in one moment there was a
rending of the blue wall (like a curtain being torn) and a terrible
white light from beyond the sky, and the feel of Aslan's mane and a
Lion's kiss on their foreheads and then--the back bedroom in Aunt
Alberta's home at Cambridge.


Only two more things need to be told.  One is that Caspian and his men
all came safely back to Ramandu's Island.  And the three lords woke
from their sleep.  Caspian married Ramandu's daughter and they all
reached Narnia in the end, and she became a great queen and the mother
and grandmother of great kings.  The other is that back in our own
world everyone soon started saying how Eustace had improved, and how
"You'd never know him for the same boy": everyone except Aunt Alberta,
who said he had become very commonplace and tiresome and it must have
been the influence of those Pevensie children.






[End of The Voyage of the Dawn Treader, by C. S. Lewis]
